DISASSEMBLY AND BENCH CHECKS
TEST EQUIPMENT NEEDED:
Multimeter
Regulator Tester

ALTERNATOR
NOTICE: On some alternators on certain engine configurations, a 1.5 µf capacitor has been installed to the output terminal and attached with a cover screw. Remove the capacitor (DRA 1985444) before performing "Regulatror Quick Check.".
Remove screws (216) and rectifier end plate (15) to expose electronics compartment. (See Fig. 12).
Inspect electronics compartment for contamination, for shorted or grounded wires, and for loose connections. If contamination is present, clean and dry compartment before proceeding. The protective coating on all electronic components is a good insulator and must be scraped off to get a good contact for test equipment probes.

FIELD COIL
Disconnect 2 field leads (A) from regulator (6) (See Fig. 13), by removing 2 insulated regulator attachment screws (217). Use ohmmeter (or voltmeter, ammeter and battery) to check resistance of field coil.
Compare to Field Check ohms (or volts and amps) in Specifications at the end of this manual or from Service Specification Bulletin. If outside specifications, replace field coil as described later in this manual.

DIODE TRIO
To check the diode trio (7), remove it from the electronics compartment by detaching the 3 nuts (218), stator leads (B) and attaching screw (217). Note that the insulating washer on the screw is assembled over the top of the diode trio connector. Discard screw if insulation is fractured during removal.

CAPACITOR
Remove capacitor (12) by removing the remaining two attachment screws (224) and screw (226) sliding out capacitor. (A sharp tool may be used to break varnish seal.)
Using continuity check mode (diode check mode on digital meter), check for a shorted capacitor by touching ohmmeter leads to capacitor lead (F) and grounding tab (T). (See Fig. 15) This check should show an open circuit.

REGULATOR
To remove regulator (6) for testing, remove sense lead nut (218), bridge to regulator stud connector (219) and 2 screws (217) if not removed previously and screw (224). Disconnect “I” terminal sense lead strap to allow regulator removal. (See Fig. 16) Note: Discard insulated screw if insulation is fractured during removal.
Check regulator on approved tester for SI type regulators. If regulator tests good, return it to service. If it tests bad, replace it. Install regulator as described later in this section.

RECTIFIER BRIDGE
Use the ohmmeter or (for digital meters) the diode check function of the multimeter to check the rectifier bridge (8). Bridge may be checked in place in the RE housing (1).
All terminals must be disconnected from the threaded phase studs. “R” terminal and output terminal straps (198 &186) may be raised approximately one inch (2.5 cm) above rectifier for removal of diode trio (7) or rectifier bridge (8).
Check 6 diodes as follows:
Place negative ohmmeter lead on grounded heat sink. Touch positive ohmmeter lead firmly to metal diode clips that surround each of the 3 threaded studs. All 3 readings should be the same, and indicate open circuits. Switch leads and repeat. All 3 new readings should indicate continuity (Fig. 17)
Repeat checks using insulated (positive) heat sink in place of grounded heat sink. With negative ohmmeter lead on insulated heat sink, all 3 readings should indicate continuity. Switch leads and repeat. All 3 new readings should indicate open circuits.
If all readings are correct, the rectifier bridge is good.
If any reading is wrong, an open or shorted diode is indicated and rectifier bridge should be replaced. To remove bridge, remove nut (218), nut (199) and relay strap (198) from regulator stud (193), two bridge attaching screws (226), and insulated capacitor attaching screw (224). Lift capacitor (12) and rectifier bridge (8) from SRE housing (Fig. 18).

STATOR
Disconnect the 3 stator phase leads (B) from the diode bridge studs by removing 3 nuts (218). Use continuity check function of ohmmeter to check stator windings. (See Fig. 18) Place one meter lead on one of the stator phase lead connectors and check for continuity to each of the other two stator leads.There should be continuity to both. If not, one or more of the stator coils is open; replace the stator as described later in this section.
To check for grounds, again touch one meter lead to one of the stator phase leads, and touch the other meter lead to clean metal ground on the alternator housing. There should not be continuity. If there is continuity, the stator is grounded and should be replaced as described later in this section.
It is not possible to detect shorted stator windings with ordinary shop equipment. However, if all other electrical checks are normal and the alternator has exhibited low output, shorted stator windings may be the cause. In such cases, replace the stator as described later in this section.

FINAL DISASSEMBLY
NOTICE: Do not damage exposed stator or field windings. Bumping or scraping these windings may break the insulation and leave a place for a short circuit or ground to develop later, causing the alternator to fail. Protect the windings from damage by careful handling.
To replace the field coil (9), stator assembly (11), rotor assembly (10), or drive end (5) or rectifier end bearings (2), the drive end frame assembly must be separated from the rectifier end housing. (Fig. 19) Use 5/16" hex wrench or 5/16" hex drive, in the end of the shaft, to hold while removing shaft nut (211). Remove washer (212), pulley (14), and fan (13).
Remove the 4 thru bolts (213). Carefully separate the drive end housing (4) from the stator (11) and rectifier end housing (1), taking care not to damage stator windings (See Fig. 20).
NOTICE: Rectifier bridge must be removed before removing stator. (See Paragraph 7 and Fig. 18) To remove stator (11) from rectifier end housing (1), be sure all 3 stator leads are disconnected from diode bridge studs in electronics compartment. Pry stator and housing apart carefully. Guide stator leads and grommet (C) through well as stator is pulled from housing. It may be necessary to push on grommet with a blunt instrument to unseat it from the housing (See Fig. 21).
To remove field coil and support (9) from rectifier end housing, (See Fig. 22) remove 4 field coil and support attaching screws (221). Lift coil and support from housing, while guiding field leads through hole.
To remove rectifier end bearing (2) from RE housing (1), (See Fig. 23) use small screwdriver at slot to pry plug (222) from housing.

NOTICE: Do not drive bearing out with hammer or other tool. Use arbor press to push bearing from housing.
Wipe excess grease from bearing well, then press bearing through to inside of housing.

If bearing inner race (3) appears to be worn or rough, remove from rotor shaft with a suitable puller.
To replace rotor (10) or drive end bearing (5), (See Fig. 24) remove 4 bearing retainer attachment screws (214) from outside of housing (4). Lift rotor with bearing from housing, then pull bearing off of rotor shaft. If inside collar (215) appears rough or damaged, pull collar from shaft.
NOTICE: Do not drive mounting hinge bushing from lug on rectifier end housing with a hammer or other tool. Use arbor press or vise to remove and replace bushing.
To remove mounting hinge bushing (17) from lug on rectifier end housing (1), Press bushing from housing using arbor press with suitable tool.

ALTERNATOR ASSEMBLY
ASSEMBLY OF DE FRAME AND ROTOR

INSTALL OR CONNECT
Press inner race for rectifier end bearing (3) onto short end of rotor shaft. Stop when race is 3.7 mm (.15 in.) above end of shaft (See Fig. 25).
Press inside collar (215) onto rotor shaft until collar is against shoulder on rotor (10). Place retainer plate (16) onto collar (flanged side of retainer will face away from rotor, toward bearing). Using open tube that bears only on inner race of bearing, press new DE bearing (5) onto rotor shaft until bearing is against collar.
Insert bearing (5) (on rotor shaft) into bearing well in drive end frame (4). (See Fig. 26) Bearing will be a snug fit, but should slip in easily when properly aligned. Lubricate outside of bearing very lightly with ball and roller bearing lubricant (1948791) if necessary to facilitate assembly.
Hold drive end assembly with long end of rotor shaft down so that bearing retainer plate (16) falls against housing, then align retainer with screw holes. (See Fig. 26) Start each of the four retainer attaching screws (214), then tighten screws gradually in sequence to pull retainer squarely against bearing.

TIGHTEN
Bearing retainer attaching screws (214) to 5 N.m (45 lb. in.).

IMPORTANT
To allow access for later installation of thru bolts (213), do not assemble fan and pulley to drive end assembly at this time.


ASSEMBLY OF RECTIFIER END HOUSING AND COMPONENTS

INSTALL OR CONNECT
Lightly lubricate outside surface of hinge bushing (17). Press hinge bushing into hole in lug on rectifier end housing (1). Install bushing flush with inside of lug to allow maximum distance between two hinge lugs for mounting. Final position of hinge bushing will be adjusted during mounting (See Fig. 27).
Position new bearing (2) into rectifier end housing (1) with seal toward rotor assembly (10) as assembled. Press bearing outer race into housing center hole until flush with machined face inside housing. (See Fig. 28) Push plug (222) into end of housing until outside edges are flush with edge of RE housing.
Add ball and roller bearing lubricant (1948791) until cavity between plug (222) and bearing outer race (2) is about half full, placing grease so that it touches the edge of the bearing outer race in several places around the outside of the bearing. Cover opening with tape to prevent contamination.
Turn leads so that they will be properly positioned after installation. (See Fig. 29) Place field coil and support (9) into rectifier end housing (1), guiding leads through hole into electronics compartment and aligning mounting holes in support with screw holes in rectifier housing. Ensure leads do not touch housing. Install 4 field coil and support attachment screws (221) (3 screws used in early production).

TIGHTEN
Field coil and support attachment screws (217) to 6.2 N.m (55 lb. in.).

INSTALL OR CONNECT
NOTICE: Handle stator with care to avoid bending windings or breaking varnish insulation on windings. If windings are damaged before or during installation, they may become shorted and cause reduced alternator output. Stator must be installed before rectifier.
Straighten stator leads (B) to ease installation. Lubricate grommet (C) on stator leads lightly with petroleum jelly. Welded junction connector on some stators must be positioned straight up from windings to prevent grounding to housing or rotor when alternator is assembled. Straighten stator lead wires all the way to the windings and insert through well in housing into electronics compartment (See Fig. 30).
Align thru-bolt holes in stator (11) with those in RE housing (1). Push stator into housing far enough to hold it in place, being sure grommet (C) on wires is inserted into well in housing at the same time. Stator lead wires should be stiff enough to push grommet into well as stator is installed (if not, carefully push on grommet with a blunt instrument to seat it in the well). The stator must be fully seated in housing at this time. Note: If necessary, place wood blocks on opposite corners of the stator frame and use arbor press (or tap blocks with hammer) to seat stator frame against rectifier end housing. Do not push against windings!
Rectifier bridge (8) to RE housing (1).
Install one rectifier bridge attaching screw (224) through grounded heat sink into RE housing. (Fig. 31) Finger tighten.
Capacitor (12) to holes in end of rectifier bridge (8) (Fig. 32) Install ground screw (224) through capacitor (12), grounded heat sink, and into RE housing. Finger tighten.
Output strap (186) over insulated rectifier and capacitor holes. (If new output terminal assembly, install per instructions in package.)
Insulated capacitor attaching screw (226), through output strap (186), capacitor connector (12), and into RE housing. Finger tighten.

INSPECT
Regulator mounting area for presence of grease or dirt (Fig. 33). Good electrical contact is necessary in this area.
NOTICE: Do not immerse or wet regulator with solvent. Internal damage to regulator could result.

CLEAN
Regulator mounting bosses in RE housing, metal base plate and contact rings on regulator by wiping with dry cloth.

INSTALL OR CONNECT
Regulator (6) with terminal cover (220) assembled to RE housing (1) with regulator attaching screw (224) (grounding). (See Fig. 33) Finger tighten.
One field coil lead terminal (A) over regulator (6) mounting hole closest to terminal. (Ensure leads do not touch edge of frame hole.)
Insulated screw (217) through lead terminal (A) and regulator (6) into rectifier end housing (1). Finger tighten.
Bridge to regulator stud connector (219) over threaded stud of regulator (6) with nut (218). Finger tighten.
Diode trio (7) on to 3 threaded studs on rectifier bridge (8).
Insulated screw (217) through indicator strap (208) hole, long leg of diode trio (7) and other field coil lead terminal (A) into regulator (6) unused hole and into R.E. housing. (See Fig. 34) Finger tighten.
Screw (226) through other hole in bridge to regulator stud connector (219) into rectifier bridge (8) and into RE housing. Finger tighten.

TIGHTEN
Two rectifier ground screws (224) to 4 N.m (35 lb. in.) (See Fig. 35)

INSTALL OR CONNECT
"R" terminal connector strap (198) over rectifier stud closest to capacitor (12). (If installing new "R" terminal follow instruction in package.) (See Fig. 35)
Three stator leads (B) over matching rectifier bridge (8) studs.
Three nuts (218) on rectifier bridge studs. Finger tighten.
Secure fasteners shown in the following order (See Fig. 36)

TIGHTEN
One regulator ground (mounting) screw (224) to 2.5 N.m (23 lb. in.)
Two insulated regulator screws (217) to 2.0 N.m (20 lb. in.)
Two rectifier bridge insulated screws (226) to 2.0 N.m (20 lb. in)
Three rectifier bridge nuts (218) to 2.5 N.m (23 lb. in.)
Regulator stud nut (218) to 2.0 N.m (20 lb. in.)

FINAL ALTERNATOR ASSEMBLY

CLEAN
Inner race of rectifier end bearing (3) on rotor shaft to prevent contamination of grease. (See Fig. 37) Remove tape to expose rectifier end bearing.
Align mounting lugs and assemble two halves of alternator (See Fig. 37), inserting rectifier end bearing inner race (on rotor shaft) into bearing in rectifier end housing (1). Seat drive end housing (4) at this time. Using arbor press and appropriate block to apply even pressure on end frames.
Insert 4 thru-bolts (213) through drive end housing (4) and stator (11) into threaded holes in rectifier end housing (1). Align housings and stator as needed to allow thru-bolts to stand straight in holes and engage threads. When all four thru-bolts are inserted, tighten them in round-robin fashion.

TIGHTEN
Thru bolts (213) to 12.4 N.m (110 lb. in.)
After assembly, dip rectifier end frame of alternator about one and one quarter inch (1¼") deep into clear electric grade varnish or otherwise coat area of electronics to protect from corrosion (See Fig. 38).

INSTALL
NOTICE: Make sure varnish is dry before proceeding.
After varish is dry, install rectifier end cover plate (15) with four attachment screws (216). If removed, replace capacitor (DRA 198544) with one screw (216) (See Fig. 39).

TIGHTEN
Attachment screws (216) to 3 N.m (26 lb. in.).

INSTALL
Fan (13) onto rotor shaft with vanes toward body of alternator (See Fig. 40).

NOTICE: Several pulley styles are available from ACDelco for 7/8" shaft alternators, including a blank that can be custom machined for unique applications.
Pulley (14) suitable for engine application.
Flat washer (212) and lock nut (211) onto shaft with locknut flat side next to washer.
Insert 5/16" hex wrench or driver into end of shaft. Holding the shaft with a hex driver installed on a torque wrench makes an ideal way to check torque while tightening the nut. Tighten pulley nut to 102 N.m (75 lb. ft.).


ALTERNATOR BENCH TEST

TEST EQUIPMENT NEEDED:
Alternator Test Stand (5000 rpm capability at least 5 HP)
Battery or Battery Set (fully charged)
Variable Carbon Pile Load Test
Ammeter (current capability at least 15 amps higher than alternator rating)
Voltmeter
Ohmmeter

The bench test procedure will verify alternator performance prior to installation on the vehicle. This test checks the alternator output in the same manner as the Rated Output Check covered earlier. If bench test equipment is not available, install the alternator on the engine according to manufacturer’s instructions and repeat the Rated Output Check to verify alternator operation. If bench test equipment is available, proceed as follows:
Mount alternator in test stand according to test stand manufacturer’s instructions.

IMPORTANT: Battery or battery set must be fully charged for test results to be valid.
NOTICE: When a 12-volt carbon pile load test is used to diagnose a 24-volt system, attach load test only to 12-volt potential in battery set. Attaching a 12-volt load test to a 24-volt potential will damage the carbon pile.
With carbon pile load turned off and with battery or battery set fully charged, make electrical connections as shown in Fig. 41. Battery voltage and ground polarity must be same as system in which alternator is used. Check and record battery or battery set voltage before proceeding with test.
With carbon pile load off, start test stand and slowly increase alternator speed to highest rpm shown under Cold Output specifications in 33/34 SI Alternator Specifications at the end of this manual. Observe voltmeter.
-If voltage does not increase but remains at or below previous reading (Step 2), there is no alternator output. Turn carbon pile load off and stop test stand. Residual magnetism in rotor may have been lost. Skip to Step 5.
-If voltage increases above 15.5 volts on 12-volt system (or above 31 volts on 24-volt system), voltage is uncontrolled. Turn carbon pile load off and stop test stand. Recheck alternator for proper assembly. If alternator has been assembled properly, replace regulator as described under Unit Repair. Also check field coil for shorts and replace if defective.
-If voltage is proper, proceed to next step. With alternator running at highest rpm shown under Cold Output in Specifications, turn on carbon pile load and adjust to obtain maximum alternator output on ammeter.
-If ammeter reading is within 15 amps of Cold Output in Specifications, alternator is good. Turn off carbon pile load and stop test stand.
-If ammeter reading is more than 15 amps below specification, alternator is not operating properly. Turn off carbon pile load and stop test stand. Return to Unit Repair section in this manual and re-diagnose the alternator.
CAUTION: Do not allow jumper lead to be accidentally grounded while connected to battery insulated terminal. If the free end of this lead is accidentally touched to the alternator housing or other grounded areas, the jumper lead may quickly get hot enough to cause a skin burn or to damage the jumper lead. Keep jumper lead carefully insulated from grounding during this procedure.


Disassembly of the Toyota / Nippondenso Alternator: 

Removing the Back Cover:
On the backside of the alternator there are three retaining nuts. Using the five-in-one screwdriver with the screwdriver element removed, remove the three 3/8” (9 mm) nuts that secure the sheet metal back of the alternator. If you do not have a five-in-one screwdriver, use a 3/8” or 9 mm socket wrench. Keep the nuts(unless otherwise specified, keep all of the nuts,screws and other components of the alternator). 
The sheet metal back cover of the alternator is attached with three screws. 
Remove the screwdriver element from the five-in-one screwdriver. 
Remove the three nuts that hold the sheet metal cover of the back of the alternator on. 
With a crescent wrench, remove the nut(s) that hold the black plastic insulator on the copper positive(+) contact on 
the side of the alternator. 
Remove the black plastic insulator from the positive (+) copper contact. 
Remove the sheet metal back cover of the alternator. 

Removing the Voltage Regulator and Brushes from the Alternator:
Once the back cover is removed, the rectifier, voltage regulator and brush assembly will be exposed. The voltage regulator is the electronic component with heat fins on top(a row of raised ridges that dissipate heat)that terminates in the round plug interface on the back of the alternator. The brush assembly is a pair of spring-loaded carbon contacts that contact the rotor in the center of the alternator. Remove the three screws that hold the voltage regulator in place. Remove the two screws that hold the brush assembly in place. Discard the regulator, brush assembly and retaining screws for the regulator and brush assembly.  
Removing the three retaining screws for the voltage regulator. 
Removing the two screws for the brush assembly. 
Removing the voltage regulator. 
Removing the brush assembly. 
The alternator with the voltage regulator and brush assembly removed. 

Removing the Rectifier from the Alternator:
The rectifier is the last remaining electronic component on the back of the alternator. It has four screws on the side that connect to wire lugs. These lugs are attached to copper wires that enter the alternator through rubber insulators. These four screws connect the rectifier to the stator inside the alternator. Remove the four screws from the side of the rectifier. Pulling upwards, gently remove the rectifier from the alternator. Remove the four rubber insulators that surround the now exposed wires. Retain the four rectifier screws and four rubber insulators for later use. 
Removing the four screws that connect the rectifier to the stator inside the alternator. 
Removing the rectifier from the alternator. 
Removing the four rubber insulators from the wires that connect the rectifier to the stator. 

Removing the Back of the Alternator to Reveal the Rotor and Stator: 
Once the rectifier has been removed, use the five-in-one screwdriver to remove the four nuts that hold on the back of the alternator. Grasp the alternator by the back ports of the alternator. Hold the alternator aloft with one hand. Tap the sides of the alternator with a mallet or piece of wood to loosen the back and front of the alternator. Use the five-in-one screwdriver to gently pry apart the front and back of the alternator. Continue tapping the sides of the alternator and gently prying the front and back of the alternator until the back comes off. This may take a while. 
Removing the nuts that hold the front and back of the alternator together. 
Tapping the sides of the alternator while holding it aloft. 
Prying the alternator apart with the five-in-one screwdriver. (Note: A puller can accomplish this task with ease.) 
Removing the back of the alternator from the front of the alternator, revealing the rotor and stator. Remove the four threaded studs that hold the stator in place. 
Once the back of the alternator has been removed, there will be access to four threaded studs.These threaded studs secure the stator to the front of the alternator. Remove the four threaded studs. 

Removing the Rotor from the Alternator:
Removing the rotor from the alternator can be somewhat difficult. The pulley at the end of the rotor is often hard to get off. Find the pulley on the front of the alternator at the end of the rotor. Using a plumbing torch, heat the end of the rotor and the nut that holds the pulley on the rotor. While still hot, soak the end of the rotor and pulley-retaining nut in penetrating oil.Clamp the pulley in a bench vise. Using a socket wrench, remove the retaining nut that holds the pulley on the rotor. Clamp the alternator in a bench vise. Take a piece of wood or wooden mallet and tap the threaded end of the rotor. Remove the pulley from the rotor. Continue tapping the end of the rotor until it comes out of the alternator. 
(Note: A puller can accomplish this task with ease.) 

Removing the Stator from the Alternator:
Removing the stator from the alternator can be difficult. At this point in the disassembly, only dirt, friction and oxidation should be holding the stator in place. Still, it can be difficult to pull. Before you begin, use an awl to make registration points on the stator and the alternator body at the same point so that the stator can be reinstalled in the same location. Also, make marks on the stator core indicating where each phase of the stator wind terminates, and mark the common termination of the phases(these are the copper leads that connect the stator to the rectifier.) 
Apply liberal amounts of penetrating oil between the stator and the alternator body. Holding the alternator aloft, and using gravity to assist you, tap on the outside of the alternator with a mallet to loosen up the stator from the alternator case. Be patient, it could take a while. 
(Note: A puller can be modified to make this process much easier.) 

Building the Permanent Magnet Rotor: 
The permanent magnet rotor is composed of several elements: a spindle,bushings and core. It is roughly the same dimension as a factory rotor but rather than employing an electromagnet it is arrayed with permanent magnets. The spindle and bushings are turned on a metal lathe. The core is composed of twelve-sided sheet metal laminates that are glued together. The sheet metal laminates are usually cut with tin snips and drilled out manually. If you have access to a laser-cutter or a water-jet cutter and CNC, this process can be made much quicker. If made by hand, the assembled core is then bored out in the center to receive the spindle. In addition, four holes are drilled around the center to receive the nuts and bolts that hold the laminates together. Finally, twelve permanent magnets are epoxied to the twelve facets of the core. You will need a metal shop to turn the spindle and bushings of the rotor. 

Turning the Spindle and bushings:
This is a job for the metal lathe. 

Building the Rotor Core:
As stated above, there are a few different methods for cutting the sheet metal laminates that make up the core. For the purposes of this manual, we will be cutting and drilling them by hand. The total width of the completed core is 1.5.” (38.1 mm)When selecting the sheet metal for the laminates, it should be thin enough to be easily cut with tin snips. The number of laminates needed to make up the 1.5” width of the core is dependent upon the thickness of the sheet metal used. If cut by hand, 26 gauge sheet metal should be used. The sheet metal template included below shows the dimensions of the laminates. To ensure that you have the right dimension, the correct measurement between two opposing facets is 73 mm. 
After determining that you have the right size paper template, make a cutout of it, and accurately make a master template out of sheet metal. Use this template to trace all the remaining laminates. Use the same master template for all of the laminates. Have a sheet metal shop cut the sheet metal into appropriate sized squares, 10 cm x 10 cm, before you begin, so that the laminates are easier to work. The sheet metal blanks should be washed with soap and water to degrease them so that the contact cement will adhere to them. 
Once you have determined that you have enough laminates to make up the width of the core, coat each surface thinly with contact cement. Let the contact cement set as directed by the manufacturer before gluing the laminates together. The contact cement takes up a small amount of dimension in the overall thickness of the core. When the laminates are clamped together they will compress. Make extra laminates to make up any discrepancy in the thickness of the core. Leave the two laminates that will be on the outside of the core with one side free of contact cement. 
Make up 1/2” thicknesses of glued laminates and then glue these 1/2” thicknesses together to make the total 1.5” thickness of the core.Make sure that the laminates are lined up with each other as closely as possible. Clamp the laminates together to squeeze out any excess contact cement. 
Once the laminates are glued together use the paper template to make registration marks for the four holes that receive bolts to hold the laminates together. Use an awl to make these registration marks. With a drill press, drill out the four holes to receive the nuts and bolts that hold the laminates together. Drill pilot holes first and work your way up to the finish diameter of the holes. The finish diameter of the holes should be 1/4”. Bolt the laminates together using 2 “ long, 1/4” bolts, nuts, washers and lockwashers. 
Have a machinist bore out the center hole at 15 mm to receive the spindle. 
(Note: The center hole in the core is crucial to proper function of the alternator. It is recommended that this hole be cut with a cutting tool on the lathe and not with a drill bit, as any drift in the drill bit will be a disaster!) 

Machining the Spindle and Bushings:
The spindle should be 15 mm in diameter, 6.25” in length and threaded at one end. The threaded end is 1.25” in length to receive a 1/2” nut. The threaded end of the spindle should be machined square at 3/8”, 1/4“ in from the end of the spindle. The length of the threaded and square-machined end should be a total of 1.5”. 
The thickness of the bushing on the threaded end of the spindle(the top bushing) is 15 mm. The thickness of the bottom bushing is 10 mm. Both bushings should be 30 mm in diameter, with a 15 mm hole in the center. Again, a metal lathe will be needed for this process. 5 mm wide x 10 mm long hex set-screws are tapped into the side of the bushings to link them to the spindle. 

Attaching the Spindle to the Core and Bushings:
The distance from the bottom of the spindle (the non threaded end) to the 10 mm bottom bushing is 38 mm. The distance from the top of the spindle (the threaded end) to the top bushing is 60 mm. Once you have determined the location of the core and bushings on the spindle, tighten the hex set-screws on the bushings to the spindle. Loosen the hex set-screws on the bushings from the spindle and note the marks that are left in the spindle from the hex set-screws. Using a file, file the small area on the spindle where the hex set-screw contacts the spindle flat, so that where assembled, the hex set-screw won't slip on the spindle. Reattach the core and bushings to the spindle with the hex set-screws. 
Once assembled, drill a 1/8” hole in the top of each bushing through the bushing and into the core. Take two 1/8” drill bits, cut them in half and discard the cutting ends of the bits. These will act as pins to link the rotor core to the bushings. Put a slight bend in the non-cutting end of each of the bits. Coat the ends of the bits in epoxy. Drive the bits through the bushings and into the rotor core to pin the bushings to the core. Drive the pins just below the flush surface of the bushings, marrying the bushings to the core and the bushings/core to the spindle. 
(note: Though this method of marrying the core and bushings to the spindle works well, other schemes of marrying these elements such as using compression between the core and the spindle show promise. A number of different schemes could work here depending upon facilities.) 
Attaching the Permanent Magnets to the Core: 
Clamp the rotor in a vise by the core. The core now has twelve facets that should be 1.5” in length and .75” in width. Because the laminates are cut by hand, there is some variation in dimension. File down each facet until they are as close as possible to the 1.5” x .75” desired dimension. Do not exceed the 1.5” by .75” dimension. 

(Note: This filing can be accomplished much more quickly with a sanding machine, but extreme care should be taken not to remove too much material from the facets of the core.) 
Now that the core and bushings are attached to the spindle it is time to attach the neodymium magnets to the core. Special care should be taken when handling the neodymium magnets. They are very strong magnets, but also very brittle. Once removed from the packaging and separated, they should be kept at least 16 inches from each other and anything magnetic.Failure to do so may result in personal injury or damage to the magnets.Gloves should be worn when handling the magnets, so that if you do come in contact with anything magnetic you won't get hurt. 

Determine the Poles and Mark: 
The magnets will be arrayed on the core with poles alternating, north/south,north/south, etc. Once the magnets are removed from the packaging, set them out on a bench in a row at least 16” apart. With a gloved hand, use one of the magnets as a test magnet. Determine the poles of each magnet by holding the test magnet to each of the magnets on the bench. Turn the magnets over until each magnet in the row on the bench is alternately attracted and repulsed by the magnet in your gloved hand. Double check to make sure that you have determined that each magnet in the row is alternately attractive and repulsive to the magnet in your hand. Use aSharpie pen to mark the magnets north and south. 
(Note: The designation of north and south on the magnets is arbitrary. The important thing is that the magnets alternate in polarity when arrayed on the rotor core.) 
The back, unmarked, side of the magnets are roughed up with emery cloth or sandpaper for better adhesion to the core. 

Epoxying the Magnets to the Core:
For easier attachment of the magnets to the rotor, drill a hole in a piece of wood to receive the end of the spindle. Clamp the wood into a vise and place one end of the spindle in the hole in the wood. 
Once the magnets are placed on the core they will want to pull toward each other. For this reason twelve spacers should be made up to keep them apart. Use non-magnetic wooden coffee stirrers or pieces of plastic to keep them apart. The spacers should be 1/8” width and at least 2” long. 
Make up a small batch of epoxy (JB weld or a similar metal epoxy is best).Wearing gloves, coat a magnet on its non-marked side and coat a facet of the rotor core with epoxy. Lower the magnet into place, being careful not to break the magnet with the magnetic force between it and the rotor core.Repeat this process for all twelve magnets alternating north, south, north,south, etc. 
(Note: Wear gloves during the attachment of the magnets!) 
Once all of the magnets are roughly in position, spacers are used to separate the magnets from each other. Reposition the magnets while the epoxy is still setting and try to make as uniform an array as possible. As the epoxy begins to set, the spacers are removed and further small adjustments are made. Mineral spirits or paint thinner is used to clean up the excess epoxy on the core assembly. 
Magnets arrayed with opposing poles on the rotor core with spacers. 
(Note: The above process should be done as quickly as possible to ensure the integrity of the epoxy. Once the epoxy has set, do not attempt further adjustment of the magnets.) 

Finishing the Rotor:
Once the excess epoxy is cleaned from the rotor, wash the rotor with soap and water. Mask the spindle with tape. Coat the core, magnets and bushings with a clear coat of polyurethane or paint. Once finished, wrap the rotor in a thick cloth and store away from metal or other magnetic material. 

Rebuilding the Stator: 
The stator is rewound with thinner gage wire than the wire that comes stock with the alternator. Once the stock wire is stripped from the stator core, it is rewound in the same fashion as the factory wind, but with thinner gage wire. 
(Note: If you are in a location where rewinding motors is readily available and cheap(as in many developing countries), you might want to hire a motor rewinder to perform this task as it is rather tedious and they will probably do a better job.) 
Stripping the Stator of Factory Wire:
The stator core is composed of thin sheet metal. Pay special attention to not damaging it, as it is delicate. Take an awl and make registration points on the core where the factory wire terminates at the wire lugs that attach to the rectifier. Using a plumbing torch remove these lugs for use in the new wind. Measure the length of the leads coming off of the stator once the wire lugs have been removed. Measure the overall height of the wind, so that it can be reproduced in the new wind and fit in the alternator. Save these measurements for future reference. 
During manufacture, the factory wire is locked into the stator core by a thick coat of varnish. In addition, the wire itself is insulated with an enamel coating. The wires are held in place in the stator core by wooden or plastic inserts in the slots that hold the wire. The wire itself is insulated from the stator core with Nomex or fish paper. The easiest way to strip the wire from the stator is to burn off the varnish, enamel coating, and other material with a plumbing torch. It is possible to remove the wire without a torch, but it is much more time consuming and risks damaging the sheet metal body of the stator. 
Once the stator is stripped of factory wire, the stator core should be cleaned. Pay special attention to cleaning out the slots that the wire sits in,and cleaning the outside of the stator where it fits into the alternator. This can be accomplished with a wire brush and a small file. It is not necessary to clean the stator core thoroughly, just remove anything that is going to get in the way of the new wind. The process of pulling the factory wire out of the stator may make small burrs in the stator core. File these smooth, so that they don't nick the new wire and cause a short circuit in the finished stator. 
After the stator core is stripped and cleaned, clean the inside of the front of the alternator where the stator core fits. Confirm that the stator core will easily slide back into position. 

Overview of the Stator Rewind: 
(Note: First we will give an overview of the rewind process, followed by more in- depth instructions on page 43) 
The stator wind is composed of three phases. Red, green and blue represent the three separate phases of the wind in the graphic below. 
To keep track of the different phases of the wind, colored straws will be placed in the slots of the stator core. These straws are used as a visual guide to simplify the winding process; they will clearly define each of the three phases. The length of the straws dictates the height of the loops of the wind. The straws should be cut to 55 mm in length. Twelve of one color straw and twelve of another colored straw. 
As each phase of the wind is completed, the straws are removed to reveal the next location for a phase. 
The finished wind must fit back into the alternator. Special attention to making the rewind the same height as the factory wind is essential. The correct height is 55 mm. 
As each phase is completed, pieces of wood are inserted into the wire slots to keep the wire tightly in place. The finished dimension of the wood pieces is 4 mm x 28 mm. Coffee stirrers cut down to 4 mm width work well. 
Once the rewind is complete, the factory wire lugs are re-soldered to the ends of each of the three phases, and to the common eye connection.When re-soldering the wire lugs to the stator, make sure that they are soldered 45 mm from the top of the stator to the center of the wire lug. 

Rewinding the Stator in Detail:
Once the stator is clean of any residual varnish or other materials, Nomex paper must be cut and folded into the cavities that receive the wire in the stator. Accurately cut the Nomex paper to 4 cm by 2 cm lengths. Fold the long ends of the Nomex back 4 mm and then fold the entire piece length wise. The Nomex should snap into place in the stator cavities with the 4 mm folded ends protruding. 
Note: Nomex is a brand name. The generic name for this material is fish paper. 
Attach the stator core to a bar clamp with a hose clamp, and clamp the assembly to a table. Insert the colored straws, twelve one color and twelve another color, alternating by color. These represent two of the three phases of the wind. Leave every third slot empty. 
Once the Nomex paper is installed in the slots of the stator, and the colored straws are installed as a guide, it is time to begin winding the stator. Locate the registration marks made earlier on the stator core for the leads of each phase and for the common eye connection. Using 20 AWG enameled magnet wire, wind the first phase of the stator in a serpentine pattern,starting from the first termination point of a phase. The winds should be 55 mm high, evenly spaced on either side of the stator core. A maximum of 15 mm of wind should protrude from the top and bottom of the stator core. As you begin the wind, make the loops shallower than the finished dimension and work your way up to the final dimension. This will allow space for all of the winds in each phase. When winding the phases, the enameled magnet wire must not contact the stator core. This will cause a short circuit. 
(Note: The wind is shallower than the finish dimension as defined by the straws.This will allow for all of the winds to fit.) 
Allow plenty of extra slack in the end of each wind to insure that there is enough wire to make the connections to the wire lugs. These wire lugs will attach the stator to the rectifier when the stator is complete. It is not crucial that each phase have exactly the same amount of winds, only that each phase has as much wire as can fit into the slots of the stator core. As each phase of the stator is complete, insert a piece of wood into each slot of the phase to hold the wire in place. These pieces of wood are part of the completed stator and should fit snugly in the stator and be trimmed to the dimension of the stator core. 
(Note: The magnet wire that is used for the stator has a very thin enamel coating for electrical insulation. Be very careful not to nick this coating as it will cause a short circuit in the finished stator and you will have to rewind it again!) 



CRANKSHAFT ASSEMBLY

Preparation:
1. Inspect the bore of the Crank Timing Gear for burrs. If necessary, lightly polish it with fine emery cloth.
2. Thoroughly clean all parts with Mineral Spirits.
3. Remove the four (4) hex plugs from the crankshaft and thoroughly clean the crankshaft with Mineral Spirits. Re-install the hex plugs with Locktite #242.
4. Test fit the prop hub. The prop hub should noT slide onto the crankshaft.
5. Place the cleaned crankshaft in a freezer at least 12 hours prior to assembly.
6. Heat an oven to 450o F. Place the crank timing gear and prop hub in the oven and heat for 60 minutes.
7. 	Apply an even coat of white lithium grease to the inside surface of bearing #1 and bearing #2 from the Main Bearing Set.

Assembly Instructions:
1. Install the Aft Woodruff Key into the crankshaft. Make sure it is fully seated.
2. Slide bearing #2 (with an even coat of white lithium grease applied to the inside surface) onto the crankshaft with the machined dot (arrow in photo) toward the crankshaft's counter-weight.
3. Install the Timing Gear with the two machined dots (arrow in photo) facing away from bearing #2.
4. Install the Retaining Ring in the groove in the crank.
5. Enlarge the oil supply hole in bearing #1 by updrilling it with a #30 drill bit. Remove any burrs which may occur while drilling.
6. Slide bearing #1 (with an even coat of white lithium grease applied to the inside surface) onto the crankshaft with the machined dot (arrow in photo) toward the retaining ring.
7. Slide the Oil Slinger onto the crankshaft with the curved (concave) side of the slinger facing the end of the crankshaft.
8. Install the Forward Woodruff Key into the crankshaft.
9. Align the keyway of the Prop Hub with the forward woodruff key installed in the crankshaft and tap the prop hub into place using a mallet and block of wood.
The prop hub must be tight against the oil slinger. Immediately install prop hub Bushing and Washer and Bolt (ACV-Z01-74). Use an impact wrench to tighten the bolt and push the prop hub against the oil slinger.



CAM ASSEMBLY

Assembly Instructions:
Note: The Assembly Lube provided with the cam gear will be used to lubricate the valve lifters in a later operation. Do not lubricate the cam shaft bolts as instructed on the assembly lube package included with the cam shaft.
Note: Cam shafts are supplied with varying hardware, all of which is acceptable. Use the hardware supplied with the cam to attach the cam gear. This may include either:
Cam Bolts with integral lock washers.
Cam bolts and wavy spring washers. Cam bolts and tab lock washers.
Note: While not common, slight interference between the cam and the connecting rods does occasionally occur. One cause of this interference is a raised edge around the numbers stamped in the shaft of the cam. Lightly polishing these numbers will remove the raised edge and eliminate a possible source of interference.

1. Align the machined dot on the face of the Cam Gear (arrow in photo)  with the slot in the Cam Shaft. Apply Red Locktite to the bolts and install the bolts and washers (if provided).
2. Torque the bolts to 20 ft-lbs.
3. If tabbed washers were provided with your cam shaft, bend the tabs against the bolt heads with a flat-blade screw- driver.



CONNECTING ROD ASSEMBLY

Assembly Instructions:
Note: Both parts of each connecting rod are stamped with a unique number, identifying them as matched parts. The connecting rods must be reassembled as matched parts, with the numbers together as shown in this photograph.

1. Remove the fastener from each Connecting Rod and carefully separate the two parts. Do not scratch or score the machined surface of the connecting rods.
2. Wipe the mating surfaces of the connecting rods and bearing halves so they are free of oil and dust. Install the bearing halves by aligning the tab on each bearing half with the notch in each connecting rod and pressing the bearing halves into place.

Note: The clearance between the rod bearings and rod journals must be between .002" and .0025". When assembling new parts, as provided in the AeroVee 2.1 kit, the proper clearance is often assumed. When rebuilding an engine using remanufactured parts, this clearance must be checked. Detailed instructions for checking this clearance are given in Tom Wilson's book "How to Rebuild Your Volkswagen Air Cooled Engine".

3. Apply an even coat of white lithium grease to the exposed surfaces of each bearing half.
4. The connecting rods are attached to the crankshaft, as shown in the photo below, with the stamped numbers facing up. Be sure to re-assemble the connecting rods as matched parts.
5. ACV-p06-33 Rods only (with starred bolt and nut): Apply Moly Lube to each rod bolt and install. Torque each bolt as follows:
first to 8 ft.-lbs.
then to 15 ft.-lbs.
then 24 ft.-lbs.
Then the final torque of 38 ft.-lbs.

ACV-p01-33 Rods only (with hex bolt): Apply "Red" Locktite (or, if supplied with your rods, ARP Ultra-Torque) to the threads of each rod bolt and install.
Torque each bolt in four steps:
first to 8 ft.-lbs.
then to 15 ft.-lbs.
then 24 ft.-lbs.
Then the final torque of 30 ft.-lbs.

6. 	Check each connecting rod for freedom of movement and .005" to .020" side clearance.




CRANK CASE PREPARATION

Preparation:
1. Separate the case halves and thoroughly clean them with mineral spirits. Remove all traces of metal chips and dust from the case. Pay particular attention to removing metal chips which still cling to the edge of machined surfaces (see photo) and to casting slag on the inside of the case which may dislodge after the engine is in service.
2. If you are painting the case, now is the best time to do so. Mask off all machined surfaces, mating surfaces, and holes before painting.

Assembly Instructions:
1. Install the head studs as shown in the photos below.
2. Lay the case on it's side so the oil pressure relief ports in the bottom of the case are accessible.
3. Find the oil pressure relief plungers (2), springs (1 long, 1 short), metal gaskets (2) and retaining plugs (2) in the Case Kit. Note: The remainder of the case kit may be discarded as it is not needed on the AeroVee.
4. Insert the grooved plunger, lightly lubricated with motor oil, solid end first into the oil pressure relief port in the bottom of the case near the prop hub. Note: The plungers must move freely in the passages. If they do not, clean the plungers with fine emery cloth until they do.
5. Insert the long spring behind the grooved plunger.
6. Place a metal gasket on a retaining plug and screw the plug into the relief port.
7. Insert the non-grooved plunger, lightly lubricated with motor oil, solid end first into the oil pressure relief port in the bottom of the case near the flywheel.
8. Insert the short spring behind the non-grooved plunger.
9. Place a metal gasket on a retaining plug and screw the plug into the relief port.
10. Install the Main Bearing Stud Seals (Qty. 6) from the Gasket Set (ACV-P02-15). The seals slide over the 6 large studs in the right case half.
11. Wipe clean the case journals and the back of each Cam Bearing and install the bearings in the left half of the case. The following photos show where each bearing is installed.
12. The flanged cam bearing for the right case half must have its alignment tab filed off. File the tab off with a fine file.
13. Wipe clean the case journals and the back of each Cam Bearing and install the bearings in the right half of the case. The following photos show where each bearing is installed.
14. Test fit each Valve Lifter in a guide. The lifters must slide freely in the guides. If a lifter sticks, clean the guide with very fine emery cloth. After test-fitting, liberally lubricate each lifter with white lithium grease and install them in their guides.
15. Test fit the Cam Shaft in each case half to make sure there is clearance between the lobes of the camshaft and each valve lifter. Interference between the cam shaft and a lifter must be investigated.
16. Install four (4) Dowel Pins in the right case half. Make sure they are fully inserted.
17. Install one (1) Dowel Pin in the left case half. Make sure it is fully inserted.
18. Install one half of the Split Main Bearing (from Main Bearing Set, ACV-P01-57) into the middle journal of each case half, carefully aligning the recess in the bearing with the dowel pin in the journal. A light tap may be required to properly seat each bearing half.
19. Apply an even coat of white lithium grease to all of the cam bearings and main bearings.




CRANK CASE ASSEMBLY

Assembly Instructions:
1. 	Apply a coat of white lithium grease to the inside of Main Bearing #4 and slide it onto the end of the crank shaft assembly. Make sure the dowel pin hole is toward the end of the crankshaft.
2. 	Carefully set the crank shaft assembly into right case half. Make sure dowel pin hole in each bearing is aligned with the dowel pins in the case half, and the crankshaft assembly is fully seated in the case half.
3. 	Important! Temporarily mate the case halves and rotate the crankshaft. Listen and "feel" for a knock which may indicate the case is interfering with the connecting rods. If interference is detected:
3a. Disassemble the case halves and identify the location of the interference.
3b. Remove crank assembly.
3c. Taking care not to get grinding dust on other parts, use a remove case material to provide at least .045" clearance. Dremel-style motor tools work well for this operation.
3d. Reinstall the crankshaft assembly and repeat step 3 until all interference is eliminated.
4. 	Apply a small amount of cam assembly lubricant to each valve lifter.
5. 	Align the single dot on the gear of the cam shaft assembly with the two dots on the gear of the crankshaft assembly and rotate the cam down into the into the cam bearings in the right case half. After seating the camshaft in the bearing, make sure the dots still align as shown in photo 5a.
6. 	impoRTAnT! Make sure the main bearings of the crankshaft are still fully seated on the dowel pins in the case half.
7. 	Align the 8 holes in the center of the flywheel with the dowel pins on the end of the crankshaft. The hole pattern permits the flywheel to be installed in only one position.
8. 	The flywheel is a tight fit onto the crankshaft. It must go on squarely. If it binds, remove it and lightly polish the dowel pins with fine emery cloth. Once the flywheel has been started by hand, complete the installation by tightening the gland with an impact wrench.
9. 	Push the crankshaft towards the back (flywheel end) of the engine and, with a feeler gauge, measure the gap between the flywheel and the rear main bearing. Record this measurement in the "Shim Chart".
10. Complete the shim chart by subtracting .006" from gap recorded in step 9. This is the total thickness of shims you will use to set the proper end play.
11. Clean the end shims with a mild solvent to remove the preservative.
12. Select any combination of three to five shims which most closely equals the "Shim Thickness" determined in step 10.
13. Check your shim selection by sliding the shims, together with a feeler gauge, between the flywheel and the main bearing. You should have between .003" and .006" of end play. If necessary, adjust your shim selection to achieve the required end play of .003" to .006". Set the shims aside for later installation.
14. Remove the gland nut and flywheel from the crank shaft. It may be necessary to use a flywheel puller.
15. Carefully align the Cam Plug, with its closed (flat) end out, and install it in the cam plug bore at the flywheel end of the case. Note: Most cases have a smooth cam bore for a “ribbed” plug. Some cases have a groove in the cam bore for a cam plug with a raised bead.
16. Apply Permatex Aviation Form-A-Gasket #3 or Flange Sealant to the mating surfaces of the case halves. Apply according to the product manufacturer's instructions. Apply sparingly.
17. Note: While assembling the case halves, the lifters in the left half will want to slide out. This can be minimized by giving them each a heavy coat of white lithium grease. Assemble the two case halves by placing the left half over the right half. Gently tap the left half with a rubber mallet to seat it against the right half of the case.
18. Place one ACV-Z01-28 washer and one ACV-Z01-75 12mm elastic stop nut on each of the six large studs. do not tighten the nuts at this time.
19. In the order shown in the photo above, torque the 6 large nuts to 15 foot-pounds.
20. Check for free movement of the crankshaft. If interference is detected, identify the source of the interference
(most likely poorly seated main or cam bearings). Note: If the connecting rods are not held near their normal operating position while checking for interference, you may experience interference which does not exist on an assembled engine.
21. In the order shown in the photo, re-torque the 6 large nuts to 25 foot-pounds. do not exceed 25 foot-pounds.
22. Check for free movement of the crankshaft, as described in step 20.
23. Apply Permatex Aviation Form-A-Gasket #3 to two (2) ACV-Z01-26 washers and place them over the cam shaft studs the lower left side of the engine.
24. Install an ACV-Z01-23 stop nut on each cam shaft stud and lightly tighten.
25. Install an ACV-Z01-26 washer and ACV-Z01-23 stop nut on the remaining (10) studs on the perimeter of the case. Lightly tighten each nut.
26. Install and lightly tighten an ACV-Z01-16 hex head cap screw, two (2) ACV-Z01-26 washers, and an ACVZ01-23 stop nut in each of the three through-holes which serve to join to two case halves. Minimal thread engagement is normal. Nuts will be flush with ends of screws.
27. Torque the two cam nuts (from step 24) to 10 ft.-lbs.
28. Torque the remaining case-assembly nuts (from steps 25 and 26) to 13 ft-lbs. There is no defined order for torquing these nuts.
29. Check for free movement of the crankshaft, as described in step 20.




PISTON & CYLINDER ASSEMBLY

Assembly Instructions:
IMPORTANT: Pistons and pins have been matched to within 5 grams. Keep each piston and pin together as a set.
1. Remove a piston ring from each piston and slide it squarely inside it's matched cylinder. Measure the gap between the ends of the ring - it should be between 0.012"-0.022". Re-install the ring on the piston.
2. Re-install the piston into the cylinder using a ring compressor.
3. Slide one piston and cylinder assembly into place on the crank case. Install the piston pin and make sure the cylinder is well seated.
4. Bring the piston to Top Dead Center.
5. Measure the deck height (distance be tween the top of the piston and the top of the cylinder). If the piston is below the top of the cylinder you have a positive (+) deck height. If the piston is higher than the top of the cylinder, you have a negative (-) deck height. Use your measured deck height to determine which cylinder shims are required from the chart on page 21.
6. Remove the cylinder and piston assembly from the case.
7. Apply a light coat of motor oil to the outside of each  piston and the inner wall of each cylinder.
8. Install the cylinder shims (as required, see chart on next  page) onto each cylinder. Align the shims so they match  the reliefs in the cylinder for the case studs.
9. Apply Permatex Aviation Form-A-Gasket No. 3 Sealant to the shims and base of cylinder.
10. Rotate the crank to bring a connecting rod to top dead center - this eases installation of the piston and cylinder.
11. Note: The arrow on each piston face points to the flywheel end of the engine. Partially slide the cylinder over the head studs. Push the piston out the bottom of the cylinder just far enough to attach the piston to the connecting rod with a piston pin, and secure the pin in place with a snap ring on each side of the piston pin. Note: The snap rings were included in the piston/cylinder box.
12. Remove excessive sealant and tap the cylinder with a rubber mallet to seat it in position.
13. Repeat steps 10 through 12 for the other cylinders.
14. Install the super tin (below) under the cylinders and cylinder head. It "snaps" in place with the dividing rib between the cylinders and the cylinder head. See photo at right.




CYLINDER HEAD INSTALLATION

Assembly Instructions:
Important: The cylinder heads will contain debris from machining. You must clean and inspect the cylinder heads for debris before installing them.
Note: The process of machining the spark lug holesfor the secondary ignitionoften damages neighboring cooling fins. Missing finsis normal. You may wish to sand/file the rough edges to make them smooth.
Note: "Grooves" in the seat of the secondary ignition sparkplug hole are normal and do not impact the seal of the spark plug washer
1. 	Install Push Rods Seals (from Gasket Set) on each end of the Push Rod Tubes. Expand the bellows end of each push rod tube slightly. This will improve the seal between the push rod tubes, engine case, and cylinder heads.
2. 	Insert Cylinder Head Gaskets into Head Assemblies.
3. Align the cylinder head with the engine studs and cylinders and then install the push rod tubes. Check alignment of Push Rod Tubes and barrels as you push the cylinder head into place.
4. 	Place washers and retaining nuts (from the head stud kit) onto the head studs. Tighten in sequence shown in drawings A and B, below. Torque sequence must be used to prevent the head from warping.
5. 	Perform this step only if the cylinder head has an o-ring recess at the base of the stud. Install O-ring (from Gasket Set) onto the two head studs that hold the rocker assembly in place.




ROCKER SHAFT INSTALLATION

Assembly Instructions:
Note: Pre-assembled rocker assemblies often need to be disassembled for proper installation.
1. Assemble the rocker shafts with the gap in the rocker blocks facing the cupped end of the rocker arms and the thin shims evenly distributed.
2. Turn each adjuster fully counter-clockwise until the pad lightly contacts the rocker arm, and then turn it back clockwise 1.5 turns.
Note: Steps 3 through 19 apply to one side of the engine at a time and will be repeated for each side.
3. Place a square spacer from the rocker arm package over each of the rocker shaft mounting studs on a cylinder head.
4. Place a rocker assembly over the mounting studs and inspect for interference between the rocker arm assembly and the head studs. If the rocker arm assembly contacts the head studs, trim the ends of the head studs to remove the interference. The spacers placed under the rocker blocks influence the alignment of the rocker arm swivel pads to the valve tip. Proper alignment is achieved when the flat of the swivel pad is partially off-center from the valve stem. This is typically achieved with 1 or 2 shims under each rocker block.
5. Observe the lateral alignment of each swivel pad to its corresponding valve stem. Arrange the spacers on the rocker shaft, between each rocker arm and mounting block, as needed to get each swivel pad properly aligned. It is acceptable to have no spacer between components if that will achieve the proper alignment between the valve stem and the swivel pad. This slight offset rotates the valve a small amount each time it opens, improving the life of the valve train.
6. Torque the hex head cap screws on the end of the rocker shaft assembly to 25 foot-pounds.
7. Remove the rocker assembly from the cylinder head.
8. Slide the pushrod length tool into a pushrod tube until it engages the lifter in the case.
9. Rotate the crank until the pushrod reaches the bottom of it's travel.
10. Re-install the rocker shaft assembly and secure it with the retaining nuts included with the valve covers. Torque the nuts to 14 foot-pounds.
11. Adjust the length of the pushrod tool until it is engaging the lifter, is seated in the cup of the rocker arm, and is holding the rocker arm swivel pad against the tip of valve stem.
12. Remove the rocker arm assembly.
13. Remove the pushrod length tool without disturbing it's setting. The pushrod length tool is set for the over-all length of the four (4) pushrods for that side of the engine.
Note: It is not necessary to measure and trim each pushrod
individually, however, it may be beneficial to determine the
pushrod lengths for each side of the engine individually.
14. Allow for the length of the pushrod tip and trim the pushrod bodies as needed.
15. Make sure the inside of each pushrod is clean.
16. Press a tip onto each of the trimmed pushrods. The end of the pushrod body may be heated if necessary, but do not apply excessive localized heat.
17. Apply white lithium grease to the end of each pushrod and slide them into the pushrod tubes.
18. Re-install the rocker assembly, carefully aligning the pushrods with the cups of the rocker arms.
19. Install the rocker assembly retaining nuts and torque them to 14 ft-lbs.
20. Repeat steps 3 through 19.




OIL SCREEN INSTALLATION

Assembly Instructions:
1. Install a gasket from the oil change kit over the studs in the oil sump.
2. Install the oil screen.
3. Install the second gasket from the oil change kit over the oil screen.
4. Install the steel bottom plate, or optional ACV-P02-20 Oil Sump Plate, with the 6mm copper washers from the oil change kit and the 6mm nuts from the shakeproof nut kit. Do not over-tighten these nuts.
0r
	Install the optional ACV-P02-20 Oil Sump Plate with the provided 6mm copper washers and acorn nuts. You may also use the elastic stop nuts from the Shakeproof nut kit instead of the acorn nuts.
5. Install the oil drain plug and included metal/copper gaskets, or the optional oil temp sender w/gasket.
Note: On engine cases requiring an ACV-P01-12 Oil Temperature Plate it is recommended that an oil temperature sender be installed in that plate rather than the oil screen. See "Block-Off Plates and Plugs", page 30.
Note: It is not uncommon to have to deform the oil screen when installing the optional oil temp sender.




OIL PUMP INSTALLATION

Assembly Instructions
1. 	Measure the clearance between the pump gears and the pump cover. Proper clearance is .000" to .004". Tighter is better. Clearances greater than .004" will result in reduced oil pressure.
2. 	Install oil pump gasket under the oil pump housing and align pump housing with oil galley ports.
3. 	Tap oil pump housing into place with a plastic mallet.
4. Liberally grease the top gear and install it, making sure it engages the cam.
5. Liberally grease and install the free running bottom gear.
6. 	Apply a very thin coat of Aviation Form-A-Gasket or Flange Sealant to the oil pump cover. If installing the ported oil pump, make sure the oil passages are aligned properly (see photo, next column).
Important! Failure to properly align the passages in the ported cover plate will result in low oil pressure and engine damage.
7. 	Install the 4 mount bolts and torque them to 14 ft-lbs.


Oil Cooler Installation
Installation of an oil cooler is described in the Appendix of this manual. All oil cooler installations must use threaded AN fittings and high quality -06 hose.

Operation Without an Oil Cooler
To operate your AeroVee without an oil cooler you must either run a loop of -06 hose from the output side of the ported pump to the input side of the ported pump, or replace the entire pump with the ACV-P01-56 Straight (unported) Pump.
Important: do not plug the output and input ports of a ported pump with plugs. This will prevent oil flow and cause significant engine damage.
Important: do not replace a ported pump cover with a non-ported cover. This will prevent oil flow and cause significant engine damage.
Additional information on installing oil coolers can be found in Appendix A of this manual.




OIL SEAL INSTALLATION

Assembly Instructions
Note: The correct number and thickness of end shims was determined in Crank Case Assembly, page 17.
1. 	Clean the oil seal bore of excessive sealant, particularly around near the case parting lines.
2. 	Install the end shims over the flywheel end of the crank.
3. 	Apply a light coat of High Temperature RTV Silicone Gasket Maker to the outside diameter of the oil seal and install the seal. A VW seal installation tool may be used for best results, however the seal can also be lightly tapped in place if care is used.
4. 	Wipe off any excess sealant.




PROP DRIVE LUG INSTALLATION

Assembly Instructions
1. 	Insert a prop drivebushing into the prophub.
2. 	Insert the bolt througha drive bushing using asocket as a spacer.
3. 	Use the bolt, washer, nut and socket to pullthe drive bushing intothe hub.
4. 	Repeat for other 5 driveBushings.




VALVE ADJUSTMENT

Assembly Instructions:
1. Rotate the prop hub until the # 1 cylinder is at top dead center and both the intake and the exhaust valves are closed (valve springs fully extended). The TDC mark on the prop hub should also be lined up with the split-lineof the engine case.
2. Insert a .006" feeler gauge between the adjusting screw and the valve.
3. Adjust the screw until the 0.006" feeler gauge moves smoothly between the valve and the swivel foot.
4. Lock the adjustment screw in place by torquing the locking nut to 14 foot pounds.
5. Recheck the valve setting with the .006 feeler gauge.
6. Repeat steps 2 through 5 for the other valve of cylinder #1.
7. Rotate the crankshaft 180 degrees and adjust the valves of cylinder #4, following steps 2 through 6.
8. Rotate the crankshaft 180 degrees and adjust the valves of cylinder #3, following steps 2 through 6.
9. Rotate the crankshaft 180 degrees and adjust the valves of cylinder #2, following steps 2 through 6.
10. Install the valve covers using the cork gaskets, hex head cap screws, O-rings, and washers included with thevalve covers. The cap screws are tightened by feel to secure the covers and prevent leaks.




BLOCK-OFF PLATES and PLUGS

Assembly Instructions
1. Install fuel pump block-off plate using ACV-Z01-18 Bolts (Qty 2) and the corresponding gasket (from Gasket Set).
2. Spread a light coat of clean engine oil on the O-rings of the oil fill plug and insert it in the case.
3. Remove the preinstalled studs from the engine case and install Oil Breather Plate using ACV-Z01-18 Bolts (Qty 4) and the corresponding paper gasket from Gasket Set. do not install the metal louvered gasket as it will restrict the breather.
4. Some engines require the installation of an oil temperature plate below cylinder #2. It is installed with two (2) ACV-Z01-23 nuts and the corresponding gasket (from Gasket Set).
Note: If your engine requires the use of this plate, it can be drilled and tapped for an optional M14 x 1.5 oil temperature probe.
5. Slide the dipstick into the dipstick tube in front of cylinder #2.
Note: The dipstick will be calibrated and marked in a later procedure.
6. If you will not be installing an oil pressure sender in the port in the side of the case (C), install a 1/8 NPT pipe plug.
Important: do not overtighten the oil pressure sender or the pipe plug as this can result in a cracked case.
Note: A small tapped hole (D) near the oil fill plug does not need to be plugged.




FLYWHEEL INSTALLATION

Assembly Instructions:
1. Using a high-temperature silicone sealant, lightly coat the dowel pin area of the flywheel and place a small bead (1/8" diameter) in the groove near the dowel pin area of the flywheel.
Note: The engine assembly DVD may show an O-ring being used instead. The O-ring has been discontinued.
2. Install the flywheel on the back of the engine.
Important: The 8 dowel pins will only align one way.
Note: The flywheel may require some effort to get it started and seated on the drive pins. This is normal.
3. Install wavy washer and gland nut with Locktite 272. Torque to 227 ft-lbs.
Note: A piece of wood temporarily bolted to the prop hub provides good leverage to keep the crank from turning while the gland nut is being torqued.




ACCESSORY PLATE INSTALLATION

1. Bend P-Lead tabs on ignition modules 900
to clear the accessory
plate.
2. Attach ignition modules to the accessory plate using ACVZ01-13 Cap Screws and ACV-Z01-30 hex nuts. Install bolt at the bottom of the slot. The note ‘ThiS Side oUT” stamped in each magnatron must face towards the front of the engine.
3. Match the accessory plate to the raised groove on the back of the engine case.
4. Attach accessory plate using the ACV-Z01-20 Bolts (Qty 3), ACVZ01-21 Bolt (Qty. 1), ACV-Z01-24 Nut, ACV-Z01-27 Washers (Qty 4). Torque to 25 ft-lbs.
5. Rotate the flywheel until the magnet shoe on the flywheel is under the Magnatron.
6. Slide the 0.010 shim between the ignition module and magnet shoe.
7. Push module down against the shim and tighten the module mount bolts.
8. Remove 0.010 Shim. 9. Repeat steps 5 through 9 for the remaining ignition module.
Note: The Ignition Timing is fixed. There is no need to time the primary ignition system.




TRIGGER SHAFT INSTALLATION

Trigger Shaft Installation
1. 	Rotate the crank until the magnet shoe (A) on the flywheel is at the top of the engine. This will also put the witness hole in the flywheel assembly (B) near the 12 o'clock position, as shown in the photo below.
2. Line up the witness hole in the trigger shaft (C) with the witness hole in the flywheel. Apply Locktite 242 to each of the four (4) ACV-Z01-81 flat head cap screws and install them loosely. They will be tightened in step 3.
Note: If your trigger shaft does not have a witness hole, the trigger shaft may be attached in any orientation.
3. Sequentially tighten the screws in the crossing pattern shown below. This will center the shaft on the flywheel.




SPARK PLUG INSTALLATION

Plug Installation:
1. Gap four (4) TOP spark plugs to 0.018".
2. Gap four (4) BOTTOM spark plugs to 0.032".
3. Apply an anti-seize compound to the threads of each spark plug and install them in the cylinders.
4. Torque each spark plug to 12 foot-pounds.




INTAKE MANIFOLD INSTALLATION

Assembly Instructions
1. 	Temporarily place each of the intake elbow spacers and intake elbows on the cylinder heads and inspect for interference between the elbows and the two upper, center head studs. If necessary, trim the ends of the studs to eliminate interference.
2. 	Apply Permatex Aviation Form-A-Gasket #3 to one side of each in take elbow spacer and position each spacer on each cylinder head, Permatex side against the cylinder head.
3. 	Apply Permatex Aviation Form-A-Gasket #3 to each intake elbow and secure the elbows to the cylinder heads with ACV-Z01-26 Washers (Qty 4), and ACV-Z01-49 Cap Screws (Qty. 4) torqued to 10 foot pounds.
4. Thoroughly clean the inside of the manifold before installing it.
5. 	Secure an intake hose to each intake elbow with a hose clamp from the intake boot kit.
6. 	Push the intake manifold securely inside the hose and secure it with hose clamps from the intake boot kit.
7. 	Secure the intake manifold to the engine with the lower, aft engine case bolt. Bend the mounting tab on the intake manifold as needed to clear the lower Magnatron.
8. 	Attach the AeroInjector to the bottom of the manifold using the remaining hose and hose clamps from the intake boot kit. Note: For uniform delivery of the fuel mixture, the AeroInjector must be installed parallel to the airframe.
Note: Fuel inlet goes to the back of the engine.
9. 	Safety wire the AeroInjector to the intake manifold.
10. Throttle, mixture, fuel line and air filter connections are described in the AeroInjector manual.




ALTERNATOR INSTALLATION

Stator Assembly
1. Test fit the stator to the stator plate. If interference is noted between the mounting lugs of the stator and the boss on the plate, sand or file the lugs to remove the interference.
2. 	Pass the wires of the stator through the hole in the stator plate.
3. Prime four ACVZ01-76 screws with Locktite 7088 Primer.
4. Attach the stator to the alternator mount plate using the four (4) primed ACV-Z01-76 screws and Locktite 242 on each screw prior.


Installing the Stator Assembly
1. 	"Paint" the surface of each magnet in the magnet ring and the outside of the stator with a permanent marker.
Important: The magnets of the magnet ring are very strong and will try to pull the stator assembly out of your hands as you install it. Maintain a firm grip to avoid pinched fingers.
2. Carefully place the stator assembly over the magnet ring with the "top" pick-up near the 1 O'clock position and the "bottom" pick-up near the 7 O'clock position. The magnet ring may force the stator assembly into an unwanted position. Rotate the flywheel until the stator plate can be properly positioned.
3. Temporarily install 6 (six) ACV-Z01-12 cap screws to secure the stator assembly in place.
4. Rotate the crank shaft 3 or 4 full revolutions. This is easily done by removing a spark plug and turning the crank with a socket wrench on the prop hub bolt.
5. Remove the stator plate and inspect the magnet ring and stator for signs that the two are in contact with each other. If the marker is intact on both parts, your clearance is acceptable. Continue with Step 6. If there is evidence of contact between the parts, use a belt sander or equivalent to remove some material from the stator where the marker has been rubbed away and then repeat steps 1 through 5.
6. Re-install the stator assembly as described in Step 2.
7. Prime six ACV-Z01-12 screws with Locktite 7088 Primer.
8. Secure the stator assembly to the accessory plate using six primed ACV-Z01-12 screws and Locktite 242.




FIREWALL PREPARATION

Before the engine is installed on the engine mount, the firewall should be prepared. This includes mounting the AeroVee's secondary ignition coils and voltage regulator.
Though not part of the AeroVee kit, careful consideration must be given to the placement of the gascolator, battery box, master solenoid, and other firewall-mounted components to avoid interference with the engine installation and assure ease of maintenance.

Voltage Regulator Installation
Note: The voltage regulator must be grounded. In a typical installation the regulator will be grounded through the hardware which secures it to the firewall. If your installation uses non-conductive materials for the firewall, or for the mounting of the regulator, dedicated ground wires will be necessary between the regulator and a suitable ground point.

1. Mount the voltage regulator to the firewall in a location which allows easy connection of the wires from the alternator. The use of 3/8" long stand-offs (aluminum or bronze tubing) is recommended to space the regulator away from the firewall.
Wiring the alternator to the voltage regulator is described later in this manual.

Secondary Ignition Coil Installation
Note: The ignition coils must be grounded. In a typical installation the coils will be grounded through the hardware which secures them to the firewall. If your installation uses non-conductive materials for the firewall, or for mounting the coils, dedicated ground wires will be necessary between the coils and a suitable ground point.
1. Mount the ignition coils (ACV-A01-25) to the firewall in a location which allows easy connection of the lower spark plug wires. The use of 3/4" long stand-offs (aluminum or bronze tubing) is recommended to space the coils away from the firewall.




MOUNTING the ENGINE

Sonex Aircraft Airframes
Bolting the engine to the engine mount is shown in detail in the "Engine Installation, AeroVee" drawing of your airframe plans and on the next page of this manual, however, these few notes may save you some time.

All Airframes

Mount Bushings
The engine mount bushings will go on the engine mount much easier if they lightly lubricated with soapy water.

Lifting the engine
When lifting the engine into place care must be taken to make sure the pushrod tubes are not damaged.

Installing the mount Bolts
The head of the mounting bolts may be inserted in either direction.

A typical engine mount and shock-rubber installation. A minimum of two ACV-Z01-40 washers (1/8" thick total, minimum) must be placed against the front bushing. Additional washers may be used as needed, and washers may be used behind the rear bushings as spacers to shim the thrust line as needed.



MAGNATRON IGNITION WIRING

Magnatron Circuit Basics
The magnatron is a very simple ignition system, however, understanding the circuit wiring is often confusing. Unlike most other electrical devices, when the switch is "Off" the Magnatron circuit is closed and the Magnatrons are disabled. When the switch is "On" the ground path is open and the Magnatrons become operational.

Magnatron Wiring
The Magnatron ignition should be controlled by a single Dual Pole, Single Throw (DPST) toggle switch.
To check for proper switch installation:
A. Place the switch in the down ("Off") position.
B. Place an ohmmeter across a pair of the switches' terminals. If there is no resistance (0 ohms) between the terminals, the switch is properly oriented in the panel. If the resistance is infinite, the switch is "On" and needs to be rotated 180-degrees in the panel for proper installation.

1. Attach a 20 gauge (minimum) ground wire to the body of each magnatron. The ground wire may be attached to a magnatron mounting bolt, or to one of the "studs" (A) on the metal frame. Attach the other end of the ground wire to a suitable ground on the engine block. Do not attach the ground wire to the "p-Lead" terminal ("B", photo below). This terminal must only be used for the ignition switch wiring.
2. Attach a 20 gauge (minimum) wire between a DPST ignition switch and the P-Lead terminal (B) of each magnatron.
3. Attach a 20-gauge (minimum) wire between the remaining terminals of the DPST switch and an appropriate airframe ground.
4. Slide a spark plug boot over the end of each spark plug wire.
5. Attach the top Magnatron's spark plug wires to the upper front spark plugs.
6. Attach the bottom Magnatron's spark plug wires to the upper rear spark plugs.




ELECTRONIC IGNITION WIRING

Top Trigger Wiring
1. Black wire (ground). Attach to any ground point. The ground wires from both the top trigger and bottom trigger can share the same ground point.
2. Red wire (+12V). Attach to rear terminal screw of right hand coil (terminal "B" in photo).
3. Orange wire (Trigger). Attach to the front terminal (terminal "A" in photo) of right hand coil.

Bottom Trigger Wiring
1. Black wire (ground). Attach to any ground point. The ground wires from both the top trigger and bottom trigger can share the same ground point.
2. Red wire (+12V). Attach to the rear terminal screw of left coil (terminal "C" in photo).
3. Orange wire (Trigger). Attach to the front terminal (terminal "D" in photo) of left coil.

Coil Wiring
1. Connect an 18 ga. wire between terminals "B" and "C". This is a jumper for the +12V power supply wire.
2. From the ignition switch, run an 18 ga. wire through a 10 amp fuse and connect the wire to terminal "B" of the right coil.
3. The coils must be grounded. In a typical installation the coils will be grounded through the hardware which secures them to the firewall. If your installation uses non-conductive materials for the firewall, or for the mounting of the coils, dedicated ground wires will be necessary between the coils and a suitable ground point.




SPARK PLUG WIRES

Assembly Instructions:
important: The factory crimped ends of each wire will be re-used. When cutting the wires to the correct length, do not cut the crimped ends off.
Note: Extra wires have been included with your kit. It is possible to wire your secondary ignition with a single package of spark plug wires, leaving the second set for spares.

1. 	Determine the length for each spark plug wire. The front, lower plug wires attach to the right coil. The rear, lower plug wires attach to the left coil. The pre-crimped ends are kept in place for the spark plugs. Cut the wires to the correct length.
2. 	Slide a boot (included with ACV-A01-24) over the cut end of each spark plug wire.
3. 	Remove the black outer jacket and the white insulation core to expose a 3/8" length of the inner conductor.
4. 	Fold the conductor over the jacket and crimp a metal connector in place. The end of the cable must come to the hole in the connector.
5. 	Slide the boot over the connector. This is the end of the cable which attaches to the coil.
6. Attach the spark plug wires to the coils and spark plugs.



Assembly
During assembly, it is suggested that you mark each paragraph of the instructions as you complete it. This will help you to avoid skipping a section should you be interrupted during the assembly process.
Begin by “lapping” all the mating and working surfaces. Refer to the General Procedures section on lapping if necessary. The areas that require lapping are:
Both open ends of the cylinder (53113)
The port face of the cylinder (the side with the 3 openings)
The valve face (53127) with the shallow rectangular opening
Both sides of the steam chest assembly (A2017)
The flat side of the steam chest cover (53133)
The flat side of the cylinder cover assembly (A2021)
One side of the plain cylinder cover (53115
If you intend to polish your engine, polish these parts at the same time you lap them.
Clean all of the lapped parts. Be sure no abrasive residue remains in the steam passages in the cylinder or in the seals on each end of the steam chest and cylinder cover assembly.
Install the piston O-Ring (40009) in the groove of the piston assembly (A2015).
Place the cylinder on end with the port face to the left and the mounting face toward you.
Install the cylinder cover assembly on the top end of the cylinder using an oiled gasket. Using the 3/32” hex socket wrench (51101), install four 0-80 x 1/8” hex head screws (10808) to attach the cylinder cover. Snug but DO NOT tighten the bolts.
Place a drop of oil in the piston rod hole on the cylinder cover assembly. Place a drop of oil on the O-ring on the piston assembly and on the piston rod.
Insert the piston assembly, rod end first, into the open end of the cylinder, passing the piston rod through the seal in the cylinder cover assembly.
Press the piston completely into the cylinder so it touches the cylinder cover assembly. Loosen the four bolts holding the cylinder cover, then gently snug the two screws AWAY from the port face. Now tighten the two screws NEAREST the port face. Now remove the two screws farthest away from the port face. Later, the two cross guide rods (53068) will be installed where the screws were removed.
The purpose of this last exercise is to center the cylinder cover assembly and seal on the cylinder bore. To check this, slide the piston from one end to the other in the cylinder, using the piston rod. It may feel a little stiff as the seals will remain tight until the engine has run for a few hours. However, it should feel even from one end to the other.
Test fit the valve spindle assembly in the slots in the valve (53127). The spindle must drop into the narrow slots with the enlarged section engaged in the wide slot. The valve must be free to move on the spindle so it can seat on the cylinder port face. If the spindle is tight in any of the valve slots, open the slot up SLIGHTLY with a small file or the abrasive paper supplied in the kit.
Remove the valve spindle from the valve. Place a drop of oil in the hole on each end of the steam chest (A2017). This is to lubricate the seals that the valve spindle passes through. Insert the threaded end of the valve spindle through one of the seal holes from the inside of the steam chest. Slide it in until the other end will fit inside the steam chest. Then slide this end through the seal on the other end of the steam chest. Center the enlarged portion of the spindle in the steam chest.
Coat the port face of the cylinder with oil. Place a gasket on the port face. Place the valve on the port face with the shallow recess covering the port openings in the cylinder. With the threaded end of the valve spindle in the same direction as the threaded end of the piston rod, set the steam chest on the cylinder and align it so the valve spindle drops into the slots in the valve.
Secure the chest to the cylinder using two 0-80 x 5/16” hex head screws (10820). DO NOT attempt to tighten these screws as the threaded holes in the cylinder are not deep enough to permit the screws to tighten onto the steam chest.
Thread the 00-90 nut (19000) on the valve spindle.
Mount the cylinder to the cylinder mount (53112) using four 0-80 x 3/16” pan head slotted stainless steel screws (10212).
Attach the cylinder mount to the base (53105) using four 2-56 x 3/16” hex head screws. The threaded ends of the piston rod and valve spindle face the opposite end of the base.
Thread a 0-80 nut (10001) on each crosshead guide rod (53068).
Install the crosshead guide rods into the two empty holes in the cylinder cover. The rods should be threaded in as far as possible with only finger pressure, and for appearance purposes, should then be adjusted so the ends are an equal distance from the cylinder. Tighten the nuts onto the cylinder cover.
Slide the crosshead assembly (A2016) on the crosshead guide rods so the large hole is centered on the piston rod. The taper on the crosshead guide bearings can face either toward or away from the cylinder.
Slide the crosshead guide support (53124) on the crosshead guide rods and secure it to the base with a 0-80 x 3/16” pan head slotted stainless steel screw.
Slide the crosshead assembly against the crosshead guide support.
Place the ferrule (53122) on the piston rod with the small hole in the ferrule facing the cylinder. The threads on the piston rod will be concealed inside the ferrule.
Insert the connecting rod fork (53123) through the crosshead assembly and slide the assembly to the piston rod. The round end of the connecting rod fork will start to enter the ferrule on the piston rod. Insert a 3/32” blade screwdriver in the slot on the piston and thread the piston rod into the fork. Leave it slightly loose so the fork can be rotated. It will be tightened later.
Thread the eccentric strap assembly (A2019) 5 turns onto the valve spindle. Then rotate it until the side that has the bearing protruding faces the slot in the base. Do NOT tighten the 00-90 nut on the valve spindle.
Attach one bearing assembly (A2018) to the base near the center of the base using 2-56 x 3/16” hex head screws. The side with the protruding bearing is away from the flywheel slot in the base.
Slide the eccentric portion of the flywheel hub (A2023) into the eccentric strap assembly bearing. Lower the flywheel into the slot in the base. Slide the crankshaft assembly (A2022) through the bearing and then through the flywheel.
Slide the other bearing assembly on the crankshaft with the protruding bearing away from the flywheel. Secure the bearing assembly to the base with 2-56 x 3/16” hex head screws.
Oil the crankshaft bearings and the eccentric.
Check that the crankshaft turns freely in the bearing assemblies. It may be slightly stiff, but should not be binding while rotating. If the crankshaft does not turn freely, loosen all the screws holding the bearing assemblies to the base and then tighten them a little at a time so all the screws are tightened evenly.
Carefully inspect the connecting rod (53125). Notice that on one end, the rod has a slight protrusion around the hole on one side. Slide the connecting rod onto the crankpin of the crankshaft assembly so this protrusion is next to the crankdisk of the crankshaft. This spaces the connecting rod away from the crankdisk so it does not rub.
Place the other end of the connecting rod in the slot in the fork attached to the crosshead. Move the piston and/or rotate the crankshaft until the holes in the fork line up with the hole in the connecting rod. Place the head of the shoulder bolt (17808) into the 3/32” hex wrench and use it to hold the bolt while you insert the bolt through the fork and connecting rod. Start it from the side nearest the crosshead guide rods. Place a 0-80 nut on the shoulder bolt and tighten.


ASSEMBLY
Now it all comes together. The rest of the parts in the kit are useable as they are supplied, but you may want to clean them up with a file and/or abrasive paper for appearance.
As parts are assembled, put a light coat of oil on all the working surfaces. Use a good grade of light sewing machine or instrument oil.  Some household oils contain more solvent than oil and can not be recommended.  Automotive oil is too thick even in the lighter weights. I use Starrett Tool and Instrument oil.  It is available from many machinist supply companies.
Paper gaskets may be used if desired on all the sealing joints, but they are not necessary if the parts are well finished.  If you do use gaskets, use typing paper with oil applied to it.
Check the crankshaft assembly for any solder or retaining compound at the two joints and clean if necessary. Make sure the crankpin and crankshaft do not protrude beyond the crankdisk where they are supposed to be flush.  File if necessary.
Remove any burrs from the 5/16” x 3/16” thrust washer and slide it on the crankshaft.  Check the crankshaft fit in the bearing holes in the base.  If the base was painted, there may be a little bit of paint in the bearings.  Remove the crankshaft assembly.
Slide the valve drive yoke into the 1/16” holes in the base. This needs to be a free sliding fit. Again, check for paint. Enlarge the holes a little if necessary or bend the guide pins a little bit if there is binding at the ends of the pins only.
Insert a 2-56 x 3/32” setscrew in the eccentric. Insert the eccentric in the valve drive yoke with the setscrew ends towards the flywheel end.  Slide the crankshaft with thrust washer through the inside bearing, the eccentric and the outside bearing.
Install a 4-40 x 3/32” setscrew in the flywheel hub. Slide the flywheel on the crankshaft. Place a piece of paper or shim stock about .003” to .008” thick between the flywheel and front bearing. Apply pressure between the flywheel and the crankdisk and tighten the setscrew in the flywheel.  Remove the spacer.  Leave the eccentric loose on the shaft for now.  Rotate the flywheel gently.  There should be no binding.
Place one of the standards on the base with the groove facing inside.  Secure to the base with two 2-56 x 1/4” pan head screws.  Do not tighten.  Place the scotch yoke slide on the crank pin and place the scotch guide on the slide.  Engage the end of the guide in the slot in the standard with the 5-40 hole away from the base.  Place the other standard on the base while engaging the guide in the slot of the standard. Secure the standard to the base with two 2-56 x 1/4” pan head screws.
Cut two strips of thin paper 3/16” wide and slide them between each standard and the scotch yoke guide in the slots.  Position the crankshaft to place the guide nearest the base. Press the two standards together with your fingers. Apply the pressure over the guide locations. Tighten the four screws attaching the standards to the base. Remove the spacer papers.
Rotate the crankshaft to move the guide away from the base.  Place the cylinder mount on the standards and secure with four 2-56 x 3/16” fillister head screws.  Try rotating the crankshaft. If the guide binds, loosen the screws on the cylinder mount and spread the top of the standards apart slightly. Tighten the screws.  If binding still occurs, locate the problem and correct it before continuing.  Sometimes the standards will tilt slightly toward each other because of shrinkage in the base casting.  If this is the case, it may be necessary to remove the standards one at a time and file a VERY SLIGHT bevel on the bottom of the standard to compensate. This is normally not necessary.
Now that the bottom part of the engine is operating smoothly, remove the cylinder mount.
Install a 3/8” ID x 1/2” OD “O” ring on the piston.  Be sure to put a little bit of oil on the “O” ring. Check that the piston rod “O” ring retainer is an easy fit on the piston rod. If it is tight, enlarge the 1/8” hole with a needle file or a #31 drill bit. Make sure there are no burrs. Remove the “O” ring retainer.
Slide the piston rod through the cylinder mount from the side of the mount opposite the recess for the piston rod seal.  Put some oil on the 1/8” ID x 1/4” OD “O” ring and slide it on the piston rod.  Be gentle sliding over the threaded portion of the piston rod so the “O” ring is not damaged.  Press the “O” ring retainer on the piston rod and secure to the cylinder mount with two 0-80 x 1/8” long screws.  Thread the 5-40 jam nut on the piston rod.
Decision time:  The steam inlet and exhaust should be on opposite sides of the cylinder (but this is not required). The cylinder is completely symmetrical so the exhaust can be on either side of the engine.  If you have a preference as to which side of the engine the exhaust is on, place it on that side during the following step.
Oil the bore of the cylinder.  Slide the cylinder onto the piston and seat it on the cylinder mount.  Rotate the cylinder so the port face is to one side of the cylinder mount and secure the cylinder to the cylinder mount with six 2-56 x 3/16” fillister head screws.
Check that there are no burrs inside the steam chest.  Insert the valve rod assembly threaded end through the hole in either end of the chest from the INSIDE of the chest. Slide it all the way in.  The valve driver will barely fit past the opposite end of the chest.  Slide the rod back through the hole in the opposite end of  the chest.
Slide an oiled 1/16” ID “O” ring on each end of the valve rod.  Press them into the recess on each end of the valve chest.  Check the “O” ring retainers for an easy fit on the valve rod. Open them up with a #52 or #51 drill bit if necessary.  Remove any burrs. Slide a retainer on each end of the rod and secure them to the steam chest with 0-80 x 1/8” fillister head machine screws.  Slide the rod to make sure there are no binds. Thread the 0-80 nut on the end of the rod.
Lightly oil the port face of the cylinder.  Set the valve on the port face with the valve recess next to the cylinder.  Orient the steam chest so the steam inlet is on the opposite side of the cylinder steam exhaust and the long end of the valve rod extends beyond the cylinder mount. Place the steam chest cover over the port face with the valve driver engaging the valve in the wide slot and the valve rod passing through the narrow slot. Temporarily secure the steam chest to the cylinder with two 2-56 x 7/16” pan head machine screws. These screws may not seat as the chest cover is not installed yet.
Place the cylinder assembly on top of the standards and secure with four 2-56 x 3/16” pan head machine screws. Adjust the standards as before to make sure the scotch yoke guide is free.  Tighten the mounting screws.  Position the crankshaft to move the scotch yoke guide nearest the base.




ASSEMBLY
Construction is broken into several sub-assemblies. The first is the base-crankshaft. Then the valve gear is partially assembled on the columns in two groups, front and rear. These are then attached to the base-crankshaft assembly. Last the cylinder assembly is built and attached to the other two sections. At this point the valve gear is adjusted and the remaining details are finished up.

BASE / CRANKSHAFT
Start the assembly by placing a (51006) brass washer on each end of the (53169) crankshaft.
Place a (40050) ball bearing on each end of the (53169) crankshaft and slide them all the way against the center of the (53169) crankshaft.
Insert a BUSHING (54040) through the hole in the flat portion of each eccentric strap from the side opposite the flat side. Holding the bushings in place, file the small ends flush with the flat side of the eccentric straps. As it will be some time before assembly holds these bushings in place, temporarily use a (10212) 0-80 x 3/16” pan head screw (10212) and a (10000) 0-80 nut to hold them in place.
Install a setscrew (12608) in each eccentric. Place a drop of oil on each eccentric where it will fit into the eccentric strap. Slide each eccentric into the flat side of an eccentric strap. Position the setscrew towards the arm of the eccentric strap. Slide an eccentric assembly on each end of the crankshaft with the hub of the eccentric to the outside of the engine. Do not tighten the eccentric set screws.
Place a (40050) Ball Bearing on each end of the crankshaft and center it over the outer bearing supports on the base. Place this entire crankshaft assembly on the base. The eccentrics will be between the bearing supports on the (53177) base.
Install a (53175) inner bearing mounting cap on each inner bearing and secure with (12420) 2-56 x 5/16” fillister head screws from the bottom side of the (53177) base. NOTE: The inner bearing mounting caps have a flange on them to hold the bearing against the crankshaft.
Install a (53176) outer bearing mounting cap on each outer bearing. Make sure the bearing is still centered over the bearing support on the base. Secure with (12420) 2-56 x 5/16” fillister head screws from the bottom side of the (53177) base.
Now set this assembly aside and let's move on to the next assembly.

VALVE GEAR ASSEMBLIES
Build the two valve gear assemblies at the same time. They are identical except that they are mirror images of each other. Only the front assembly will be detailed with notes for the rear assembly. Photo 2 shows the two assemblies with the front assembly on the left and the rear assembly on the right.
Clean and remove burrs on the columns (53073), bellcranks (53074), offset links (53087), 2 hole links (53088), and Bellcrank mount bushings (54104).
The bellcranks have the remains of three small tabs used to support the part during machining. These are on the outside edges of the parts. File these tabs off and then take a few extra strokes to remove the machining cutter marks on these edges. File lengthwise on these edges. Although not necessary for operation, the flat faces of these parts can be improved by filing. If you plan to polish these parts, wait a little while, as two screws need to be filed off flush during assembly. Then you can disassemble that part, polish the bellcranks, and reassemble.
One end of the short links will also have a small tab that must be filed off. If you get a little flat on this end when filing, you can hide that end in slot of the fork a little later.
Insert a bellcrank mount bushing into the side of a column. File the small protruding end of the bushing flush by placing the file on a flat surface and slide the assembly over the file while pressing on the bushing. Repeat for the rear assembly.
The short end of each column goes toward the top of the engine. Insert a 2-56 x 1/2” pan head screw through the bushing from the small diameter end of the bushing. Thread the screw into a bellcrank. The bellcrank is spaced away from the column by the large end of the bushing. Repeat for the second column but place the bellcrank in a mirror image position. Rotate the bellcranks so the long arm is perpendicular to the column and the short end is toward the top of the column. Facing the bellcrank side of the assemblies, the front assembly will have the arms of the bellcrank to the right of the column and the rear assembly will have the arms to the left.
Place the offset links on a flat surface so the long end lays flat on the surface. The short end will not touch the surface. Insert a BUSHING (54040) in the hole in the long end of each link. File the bushings flush on the other side. Insert a 0-80 X 3/16” pan head screw through the small end of each bushing. Thread the screw into the short arm of the bellcrank from the side of the bellcrank nearest the column. Repeat for the other assembly.
[OPTIONAL] The two screw ends that protrude from the bellcrank look much better if they are filed flush with the bellcrank. After filing these screws flush, the screws may be removed and the bellcrank polished.
Then reassemble.
Insert a Bushing (54040) in one end of each of the short 2 hole links. If one end of the link is distorted from filing the tab, insert the bushing in the best looking end. The other end will be hidden during final assembly. File the protruding small end of the bushing flush with the link. Insert a 0-80 X 1/8” pan head in the small end of the bushing and attach to the long arm of the bellcrank on the side away the column. Repeat for the second assembly.

BUILDING UPWARD
The photo shows how to tie together everything we have done so far plus add a few more pieces.
Attach the 2 valve gear assemblies just completed to the right side of the crankshaft-base assembly. The right side is the side that has the extra hole near the center of the crankshaft assembly. Facing the right side, the front valve gear assembly goes to your right. Attach the columns to the base using 2-56 X 1/4 pan head screws. Make sure the long ends of the columns are next to the base. The linkage is to the ends of the engine, approximately in line with the eccentrics. As you tighten the screws, lay a straight edge between the two columns along the flat edges of the columns. Adjust the columns rotation so the straight edge touches all along both the flats on the columns.
Remove the screws used to hold the bushings in the eccentric straps. Position the bellcrank so the long end is horizontal and over the eccentric. The short end should be towards the top of the engine. Place a 0-80 X 1/8 screw through the bushing in the eccentric strap from the flat side of the strap and thread it into the tapped hole on the offset link and tighten. Slide the eccentric towards the center of the engine. View the assembly from the top of the engine. The bellcrank should be parallel to the long end of the offset link and have a uniform space between them. If not, slightly adjust the rotation of the column. Repeat for the other end of the engine. All the linkages should move freely at this point.
Clean, remove burrs, and polish the male t-slot slides (53084), the female t-slot slide assemblies (A2014), and the reverse linkage connector. Put a drop of oil in each of the female t-slot slides. Slide a male slide into each female slide assembly to check for fit. Please note that the male slides are NOT square. The narrow dimension only will fit in the female slide assembly. These will be a close fit. Do not file the slides unless absolutely necessary to fit them together. Remove the male slides. Insert the male slides in the end holes of the eccentric straps with the flat faces of the slides facing each other. Secure the male slides to the eccentric straps with 0-80 X 1/8 pan head screws.
Insert 3 setscrews (12608) in the tapped holes on the reverse linkage connector.
Attach the columns to the left side of the base using 2-56 x 1/4 inch screws aligning them in the same way you aligned the other columns. You should be able to see through both holes at the same time.
Rotate the eccentric straps so they are vertical with the “U” on the bellcranks facing upward. With the connector between the columns, insert a female slide assembly through each column and into the ends of the connector block
Now comes the tricky part. I had you insert the male slides in the female part earlier so you know they really do fit.
Rotate a female slide about 30 degrees so that it's opening is towards a point over the crankshaft at the top of the engine. Move the male slide into position over the end of the female slide by rotating the eccentric strap. Guide the male slide into the female slide and rotate the female slide so the slide part is vertical and the male slide is fully engaged. Repeat for the other set of guides.
Before setting this assembly aside, install the connecting rod assemblies (A2009) onto the crankshaft assembly. Do this one at a time so the parts of the two connecting rods do not get mixed up.
Before removing the connecting rod bearing cap from the connecting rod, mark one side of the rod and bearing cap with a marker or pencil so you know which way to reinstall the cap on the rod. A small scratch will also work and will be permanent for future use if necessary. The rod and cap have had the bearing surface machined at the same time so everything will match properly. If the caps are mixed up on the rods, there is a fair chance that one of the rods will fit tight on the crankpin.
Rotate the crankshaft so one of the crankpins is at the bottom of the engine.
Remove the connecting rod cap from the connecting rod by loosening the two screws holding the cap on. Leave the screws in the cap. Put a drop of oil on the bearing surface of the connecting rod.
From the top of the engine, slide the connecting rod between the crankwebs onto the crankpin that is at the bottom of the engine.
While holding the connecting rod in place, turn the engine over and place the bearing cap with screws on the connecting rod and tighten the screws. Pay attention to the alignment marks that you made on the two parts. The connecting rod will probably be slightly tight on the crankpin, but should move easily with finger pressure.
Repeat the procedure with the other connecting rod.
Now set this assembly aside and smile. It's starting to look like an engine.

THE CYLINDER GROUP
In this assembly section a number of parts will require lapping as described in the general procedures. I prefer to lap all the parts at the same time and then clean and oil them before beginning assembly.
Check the paragraph on gaskets and gasketing materials in the general notes. For most builders, gaskets or gasketing materials will not be necessary if lapping is done carefully. However laser cut gaskets are included.
The areas that require lapping are:
Both ends of each cylinder.
The cylinder port face on each cylinder.
The steam chest faces that contact the cylinder and chest cover.
The side of the steam chests that mount the steam manifold.
One side of the steam chest covers.
One side of the cylinder covers.
The side of the cylinder mount that does not have a seal recess.
The flanges of the manifolds.
The steam valve face with the rectangular recess.
Using a corner of the abrasive paper, remove any burrs that are around the exhaust holes on the side of the cylinder.
After lapping, clean everything to remove all traces of abrasive compound. This will require more than wiping with a cloth. The parts must be cleaned with either solvent or hot water with a detergent added.
Be sure to flush out the steam passages in the cylinders.
Remove any burrs from the piston-piston rod assembly (A2001). Put a drop of oil in the groove on each piston. Slide the 3/8 ID O-Ring (40012) over the piston and into the groove. Place a drop of oil on each O-Ring and rotate the piston to coat the O-Ring with oil.
Hold the cylinder (53004) with the valve port face towards you and the exhaust opening to your left. Slide the piston into the cylinder with the piston rod down. This is the front cylinder set.
Install the piston in the other cylinder in the same way except the exhaust opening must be to your right. This is the rear cylinder set.
Hold the cylinder mount (53071) with side containing the seal recesses away from you. Rotate the mount so the edge with three holes is down. Insert the piston rod for the front cylinder in the center hole of the right set of holes and position the cylinder so the flat port face is to your right. Secure the cylinder to the cylinder mount with two 2-56 X 1/4 pan head screws (12216). Install these two screws in the holes that are rotated 90 degrees from the 0-80 tapped holes in the cylinder mount.
Check the assembly. The exhaust outlet on the side of the cylinder must be towards the edge of the cylinder mount that has 3 holes.
Mount the second cylinder in the same manner. When mounted, both cylinders will have the exhaust outlets on the same side.
Slide a 1/8 ID O-Ring (40006) over each piston rod and press it into the seal recess on the cylinder mount. Be careful going over the threads of the piston rod so the threads don't damage the O-Ring.
Slide a 1/8 ID seal retainer (51008) over each piston rod and secure each to the cylinder mount with two 0-80 X 1/8 fillister head screws (10408).
Thread a 5-40 X 0.047 nut (53023) on each piston rod. Position it about the middle of the threaded part of each piston rod. It will be adjusted later.
Inspect each crosshead (53062) and crosshead guide (53061) and remove any burrs. Check by test fitting the crossheads in the guides.
Remove the crossheads from the guides.
Install a crosshead on each connecting rod. Thread each crosshead on about 2 to 3 turns and adjust the crossheads so the threaded 2-56 hole in each of them faces the middle of the assembly (the holes will face each other).
Slide a crosshead guide over each crosshead so the two notches in the guide fit over the two screws holding the cylinder mount to the cylinder. Secure each crosshead guide using four 2-56 X 5/16 pan head screws (12220). Put a drop of oil on each side of the crosshead guide where it touches the crosshead.
A retaining compound is used to locate the valve driver on the valve spindle on the valve spindle assembly (A2004). There may a small amount of this retaining compound at each end of the valve driver. If so, scrape it off with a knife or screwdriver blade.
Test fit the valve driver in the valve (53103) slot. It should be a free easy fit, but with very little play. If it is tight, file the inside of the valve slot until it is an easy fit.
Slide the threaded end of the valve spindle assembly (A2004) through one of the end holes in the steam chest (53007) from the INSIDE of the steam chest until the not threaded end of the spindle fits inside the steam chest. Then slide the not threaded end through the end hole in the other end of the steam chest.
Place a drop of oil on each end of the valve spindle rod. Install a 1/16 ID O-Ring (40003) on each end of the valve spindle rod using care not to damage the O-Ring when sliding over the threaded portion of the rod.
Secure each O-Ring in place with a 1/16” hole seal retainer (51007) and two 0-80 X 1/8 fillister head screws (10408).
Place the steam chest assembly on your left on the port face of the front cylinder with the threaded end of the valve spindle at the crosshead end of the cylinder. The rectangular cavity of the valve must touch the port face of the cylinder. The steam inlet on the steam chest must be on the opposite side of the cylinder from the exhaust outlet in the cylinder. If not, you probably have the steam chest on the rear cylinder. Temporarily hold the steam chest to the cylinder using two 2-56 x 7/16 pan head screws (12228). Gently tighten these screws. If tightened firmly, they will damage the lapped surface of the steam chest and may cause a steam leak later.
Install the other steam chest assembly on the rear cylinder in the same manner.
Thread a 0-80 nut (10000) to the middle of the threaded portion of each valve spindle. Thread the tapered end of a fork (53089) on each valve spindle approximately 6 turns. Position the fork so the 0-80 tapped hole in the side of the fork that faces the crosshead guide.

FINAL ASSEMBLY AND ADJUSTMENT
Now it will really become an engine. It is time to tie everything together, make all the adjustments, and finish up the engine.
Place the base assembly with the front to your right. The coupler for the valve gear should be away from you. Notice the hole in the base on the side nearest you near the center of the crankshaft assembly. With the crosshead guides down, rotate the cylinder assembly so the side with the hole near the middle is nearest you.



ASSEMBLY
Construction is broken into several sub-assemblies. The first is the base-crankshaft. Then the valve gear is partially assembled on the columns in two groups, front and rear. These are then attached to the base-crankshaft assembly. Last the cylinder assembly is built and attached to the other two sections. At this point the valve gear is adjusted and the remaining details are finished up.

BASE-CRANKSHAFT ASSEMBLY
Clean and remove and burrs on the BASE (53070), BEARINGS (53083), CRANKSHAFT ASSEMBLY (A2007), ECCENTRICS (53076), and ECCENTRIC STRAPS (53075).  Polish any parts if desired.
Slide a 3/16” x 5/16” x 0.015” WASHER (51006) on each end of the crankshaft assembly. Place a drop of oil on each end of the crankshaft and then slide a bearing on each end of the crankshaft. Slide each bearing back and forth to distribute the oil. Slide the bearings and washers against the crankwebs of the crankshaft assembly.
Place the base on a flat surface with the rounded edges of the base up. Set the crankshaft assembly so the crankwebs set in the opening in the center of the base. Secure the assembly to the base using four 2-56 x 1/4 pan head screws (12216). Do not tighten. Place the two outer bearings on the crankshaft and secure with four more 2-56 X 1/4 screws. Tighten the 8 screws a little at a time while rotating the crankshaft to check for binding. Adjust the bearings so the crankshaft turns with a minimum of binding. Minor binding will not cause any problems, as the bearings will seat in after a short period of running.
Mark the outer bearing as to position and which end they are on and remove them.
Insert a BUSHING (54040) through the hole in the flat portion of each eccentric strap from the side opposite the flat side. Holding the bushings in place, file the small ends flush with the flat side of the eccentric straps. As it will be some time before assembly holds these bushings in place, temporarily use a 0-80 x 3/16 pan head screw (10212) and a 0-80 nut to hold them in place.
Install a setscrew (12608) in each eccentric. Place a drop of oil on each eccentric where it will fit into the eccentric strap. Slide each eccentric into the flat side of an eccentric strap. Position the setscrew towards the arm of the eccentric strap. Slide an eccentric assembly on each end of the crankshaft with the hub of the eccentric to the outside of the engine. Do not tighten the eccentric set screws. Replace the outer bearings in the same position that you removed them. Tighten the bearing screws and check the crankshaft for binding.
Your base-crankshaft assembly should look like the photo on the previous page at this point. Set this assembly aside and start on the next assemblies.

VALVE GEAR ASSEMBLIES
Build the two valve gear assemblies at the same time. They are identical except that they are mirror images of each other. Only the front assembly will be detailed with notes for the rear assembly. Photo 2 shows the two assemblies with the front assembly on the left and the rear assembly on the right.
Clean and remove burrs on the columns (53073), bellcranks (53074), offset links (53087), 2 hole links (53088), and Bellcrank mount bushings (54104).
The bellcranks have the remains of three small tabs used to support the part during machining. These are on the outside edges of the parts. File these tabs off and then take a few extra strokes to remove the machining cutter marks on these edges. File lengthwise on these edges. Although not necessary for operation, the flat faces of these parts can be improved by filing. If you plan to polish these parts, wait a little while, as two screws need to be filed off flush during assembly. Then you can disassemble that part, polish the bellcranks, and reassemble.
One end of the short links will also have a small tab that must be filed off. If you get a little flat on this end when filing, you can hide that end in slot of the fork a little later.
Insert a bellcrank mount bushing into the side of a column. File the small protruding end of the bushing flush by placing the file on a flat surface and slide the assembly over the file while pressing on the bushing. Repeat for the rear assembly.
The short end of each column goes toward the top of the engine. Insert a 2-56 x ½” pan head screw through the bushing from the small diameter end of the bushing. Thread the screw into a bellcrank. The bellcrank is spaced away from the column by the large end of the bushing. Repeat for the second column but place the bellcrank in a mirror image position. Rotate the bellcranks so the long arm is perpendicular to the column and the short end is toward the top of the column. Facing the bellcrank side of the assemblies, the front assembly will have the arms of the bellcrank to the right of the column and the rear assembly will have the arms to the left.
Place the offset links on a flat surface so the long end lays flat on the surface. The short end will not touch the surface. Insert a BUSHING (54040) in the hole in the long end of each link. File the bushings flush on the other side. Insert a 0-80 X 3/16” pan head screw through the small end of each bushing. Thread the screw into the short arm of the bellcrank from the side of the bellcrank nearest the column. Repeat for the other assembly.
[OPTIONAL] The two screw ends that protrude from the bellcrank look much better if they are filed flush with the bellcrank. After filing these screws flush, the screws may be removed and the bellcrank polished. Then reassemble.
Insert a Bushing (54040) in one end of each of the short 2 hole links. If one end of the link is distorted from filing the tab, insert the bushing in the best looking end. The other end will be hidden during final assembly. File the protruding small end of the bushing flush with the link. Insert a 0-80 X 1/8” pan head in the small end of the bushing and attach to the long arm of the bellcrank on the side away the column. Repeat for the second assembly.

BUILDING UPWARD
The photo above shows how to tie together everything we have done so far plus add a few more pieces.
Attach the 2 valve gear assemblies just completed to the right side of the crankshaft-base assembly. The right side is the side that has the extra hole near the center of the crankshaft assembly. Facing the right side, the front valve gear assembly goes to your right. Attach the columns to the base using 2-56 X 1/4 pan head screws. Make sure the long ends of the columns are next to the base. The linkage is to the ends of the engine, approximately in line with the eccentrics. As you tighten the screws, lay a straight edge between the two columns along the flat edges of the columns. Adjust the columns rotation so the straight edge touches all along both the flats on the columns.
Remove the screws used to hold the bushings in the eccentric straps. Position the bellcrank so the long end is horizontal and over the eccentric. The short end should be towards the top of the engine. Place a 0-80 X 1/8 screw through the bushing in the eccentric strap from the flat side of the strap and thread it into the tapped hole on the offset link and tighten. Slide the eccentric towards the center of the engine. View the assembly from the top of the engine. The bellcrank should be parallel to the long end of the offset link and have a uniform space between them. If not, slightly adjust the rotation of the column. Repeat for the other end of the engine. All the linkages should move freely at this point.
Clean, remove burrs, and polish the male t-slot slides (53084), the female t-slot slide assemblies (A2014), and the reverse linkage connector. Put a drop of oil in each of the female t-slot slides. Slide a male slide into each female slide assembly to check for fit. Please note that the male slides are NOT square. The narrow dimension only will fit in the female slide assembly. These will be a close fit. Do not file the slides unless absolutely necessary to fit them together. Remove the male slides. Insert the male slides in the end holes of the eccentric straps with the flat faces of the slides facing each other. Secure the male slides to the eccentric straps with 0-80 X 1/8 pan head screws.
Insert 3 setscrews (12608) in the tapped holes on the reverse linkage connector.
Attach the columns to the left side of the base using 2-56 x 1/4 inch screws aligning them in the same way you aligned the other columns. You should be able to see through both holes at the same time.
Rotate the eccentric straps so they are vertical with the “U” on the bellcranks facing upward. With the connector between the columns, insert a female slide assembly through each column and into the ends of the connector block
Now comes the tricky part. I had you insert the male slides in the female part earlier so you know they really do fit. Rotate a female slide about 30 degrees so that it's opening is towards a point over the crankshaft at the top of the engine. Move the male slide into position over the end of the female slide by rotating the eccentric strap. Guide the male slide into the female slide and rotate the female slide so the slide part is vertical and the male slide is fully engaged. Repeat for the other set of guides.
Before setting this assembly aside, install the connecting rod assemblies (A2009) onto the crankshaft assembly. Do this one at a time so the parts of the two connecting rods do not get mixed up.
Before removing the connecting rod bearing cap from the connecting rod, mark one side of the rod and bearing cap with a marker or pencil so you know which way to reinstall the cap on the rod. A small scratch will also work and will be permanent for future use if necessary. The rod and cap have had the bearing surface machined at the same time so everything will match properly. If the caps are mixed up on the rods, there is a fair chance that one of the rods will fit tight on the crankpin.
Rotate the crankshaft so one of the crankpins is at the bottom of the engine.
Remove the connecting rod cap from the connecting rod by loosening the two screws holding the cap on. Leave the screws in the cap. Put a drop of oil on the bearing surface of the connecting rod.
From the top of the engine, slide the connecting rod between the crankwebs onto the crankpin that is at the bottom of the engine.
While holding the connecting rod in place, turn the engine over and place the bearing cap with screws on the connecting rod and tighten the screws. Pay attention to the alignment marks that you made on the two parts. The connecting rod will probably be slightly tight on the crankpin, but should move easily with finger pressure.
Repeat the procedure with the other connecting rod.
Now set this assembly aside and smile. It's starting to look like an engine.

THE CYLINDER GROUP
In this assembly section a number of parts will require lapping as described in the general procedures. I prefer to lap all the parts at the same time and then clean and oil them before beginning assembly.
Check the paragraph on gaskets and gasketing materials in the general notes. For most builders, gaskets or gasketing materials will not be necessary if lapping is done carefully. However laser cut gaskets are included.
The areas that require lapping are:
1.	Both ends of each cylinder.
2.	The cylinder port face on each cylinder.
3.	The steam chest faces that contact the cylinder and chest cover.
4.	The side of the steam chests that mount the steam manifold.
5.	One side of the steam chest covers.
6.	One side of the cylinder covers.
7.	The side of the cylinder mount that does not have a seal recess.
8.	The flanges of the manifolds.
9.	The steam valve face with the rectangular recess.
Using a corner of the abrasive paper, remove any burrs that are around the exhaust holes on the side of the cylinder.
After lapping, clean everything to remove all traces of abrasive compound. This will require more than wiping with a cloth. The parts must be cleaned with either solvent or hot water with a detergent added. Be sure to flush out the steam passages in the cylinders.
Remove any burrs from the piston-piston rod assembly (A2001). Put a drop of oil in the groove on each piston. Slide the 3/8 ID O-Ring (40012) over the piston and into the groove. Place a drop of oil on each O-Ring and rotate the piston to coat the O-Ring with oil.
Hold the cylinder (53004) with the valve port face towards you and the exhaust opening to your left. Slide the piston into the cylinder with the piston rod down. This is the front cylinder set.
Install the piston in the other cylinder in the same way except the exhaust opening must be to your right. This is the rear cylinder set.
Hold the cylinder mount (53071) with side containing the seal recesses away from you. Rotate the mount so the edge with three holes is down. Insert the piston rod for the front cylinder in the center hole of the right set of holes and position the cylinder so the flat port face is to your right. Secure the cylinder to the cylinder mount with two 2-56 X 1/4 pan head screws (12216). Install these two screws in the holes that are rotated 90 degrees from the 0-80 tapped holes in the cylinder mount.
Check the assembly. The exhaust outlet on the side of the cylinder must be towards the edge of the cylinder mount that has 3 holes.
Mount the second cylinder in the same manner. When mounted, both cylinders will have the exhaust outlets on the same side.
Slide a 1/8 ID O-Ring (40006) over each piston rod and press it into the seal recess on the cylinder mount. Be careful going over the threads of the piston rod so the threads don't damage the O-Ring.
Slide a 1/8 ID seal retainer (51008) over each piston rod and secure each to the cylinder mount with two 0-80 X 1/8 fillister head screws (10408).
Thread a 5-40 X 0.047 nut (53023) on each piston rod. Position it about the middle of the threaded part of each piston rod. It will be adjusted later.
Inspect each crosshead (53062) and crosshead guide (53061) and remove any burrs. Check by test fitting the crossheads in the guides. Remove the crossheads from the guides.
Install a crosshead on each connecting rod. Thread each crosshead on about 2 to 3 turns and adjust the crossheads so the threaded 2-56 hole in each of them faces the middle of the assembly (the holes will face each other).
Slide a crosshead guide over each crosshead so the two notches in the guide fit over the two screws holding the cylinder mount to the cylinder. Secure each crosshead guide using four 2-56 X 5/16 pan head screws (12220). Put a drop of oil on each side of the crosshead guide where it touches the crosshead.
A retaining compound is used to locate the valve driver on the valve spindle on the valve spindle assembly (A2004). There may a small amount of this retaining compound at each end of the valve driver. If so, scrape it off with a knife or screwdriver blade.
Test fit the valve driver in the valve (53103) slot. It should be a free easy fit, but with very little play. If it is tight, file the inside of the valve slot until it is an easy fit.
Slide the threaded end of the valve spindle assembly (A2004) through one of the end holes in the steam chest (53007) from the INSIDE of the steam chest until the not threaded end of the spindle fits inside the steam chest. Then slide the not threaded end through the end hole in the other end of the steam chest.
Place a drop of oil on each end of the valve spindle rod. Install a 1/16 ID O-Ring (40003) on each end of the valve spindle rod using care not to damage the O-Ring when sliding over the threaded portion of the rod.
Secure each O-Ring in place with a 1/16” hole seal retainer (51007) and two 0-80 X 1/8 fillister head screws (10408).
Repeat for the second set of valve chest parts.
Center the valve driver in each of the steam chests. Set the steam chests next to each other with the threaded end of the valve spindle facing you and the two steam inlets facing each other. Place a valve on each spindle.
Place a drop of oil on the port face of each of the cylinders between the steam port openings.
Place the steam chest assembly on your left on the port face of the front cylinder with the threaded end of the valve spindle at the crosshead end of the cylinder. The rectangular cavity of the valve must touch the port face of the cylinder. The steam inlet on the steam chest must be on the opposite side of the cylinder from the exhaust outlet in the cylinder. If not, you probably have the steam chest on the rear cylinder. Temporarily hold the steam chest to the cylinder using two 2-56 x 7/16 pan head screws (12228). Gently tighten these screws. If tightened firmly, they will damage the lapped surface of the steam chest and may cause a steam leak later.
Install the other steam chest assembly on the rear cylinder in the same manner.
Thread a 0-80 nut (10000) to the middle of the threaded portion of each valve spindle. Thread the tapered end of a fork (53089) on each valve spindle approximately 6 turns. Position the fork so the 0-80 tapped hole in the side of the fork that faces the crosshead guide.



ASSEMBLY
Inspect the PISTON - PISTION ROD assembly (A2001) for burrs or sharp edges on the piston and remove if necessary.
Lightly oil the piston groove. Slide the 3/8” ID O-RING (40012) over the piston and into the piston groove. Put a drop of oil on the o-ring.
Hold the cylinder (53004) with the valve port face towards you and the exhaust opening to the left. Slide the piston into the cylinder with the piston rod down. If you want the exhaust on the other side, now is the time to change it. See OPTIONS.
Turn the cylinder over so the piston rod is pointing up. Place the round gasket with the hole in the middle on the cylinder, aligning the screw holes. Place a drop of oil on the gasket to keep it from moving. Slide the cylinder mount (53009) over the piston rod so the lapped side is next to the cylinder and the long dimension of the mount is perpendicular to the cylinder valve port face.
Secure the mount to the cylinder with (2) 2-56 x 1/4” (12216) pan head screws. These screws go into the holes towards the flat ends of the cylinder mount.
Slide the 1/8” ID O-RING (40006) over the piston rod. Be careful going over the threads on the piston rod so the threads do not damage the o-ring. Press the o-ring into the counterbore on the cylinder mount.
Slide the 1/8” SEAL RETAINER (51008) over the piston rod. Secure it to the cylinder mount with (2) 0-80 x 1/8” fillister head screws (10408).
Check the CROSSHEAD (53062) and CROSSHEAD GUIDE (53061) for burrs and remove if necessary. Check the fit of the crosshead in the guide Remove the crosshead from the crosshead guide.
Install the 5-40 special nut (53023) on the end of the piston rod. Thread it almost all the way up.
Install the crosshead on the piston rod. Thread it about 3 turns on the piston rod. Turn the crosshead so the flat side with the threaded hole faces the valve port face on the cylinder.
Slide the crosshead guide (53061) over the crosshead and secure with (4) 2-56 x 5/16” (12220) pan head screws.
Slide the threaded end of the valve spindle assembly (A2004) through one of the end holes in the steam chest (53007) from the inside of the steam chest until the unthreaded end of the spindle fits inside the steam chest. Then slide the unthreaded end through the other end of the steam chest.
Install a 1/16” ID O-ring (40003) on each end of the valve spindle rod using care not to damage the o-ring when sliding over the spindle threads. Use a little oil on each o-ring.
Secure each o-ring in place with a 1/16” hole seal retainer (51007) using 0-80 x 1/8” fillister head (10408) screws. Thread a 0-80 nut (10000) on the end of the spindle.
Check the fit of the valve on the valve spindle. It must be a free easy fit with the drive sleeve on the valve spindle fitting in the slot of the valve. If not, open up the slot in the valve with a small file.
Set the valve on the steam chest so it covers all the ports.
Place the rectangular gasket with the cutout in the middle on the cylinder face. Align the screw holes and place a drop of oil to hold the gasket in place.
Install the steam chest on the cylinder with the intake hole facing away from the exhaust hole on the cylinder and the valve rod facing the same direction as the piston rod. The drive sleeve of the valve spindle must engage the valve slot. Temporarily secure the chest to the cylinder with (2) 2-56 x 7/16” pan head screws (12228). Only SNUG these screws so as to not damage the lapped surface on the steam chest. These screws will be removed to install the steam chest cover later after the valve has been adjusted.
This ends the cylinder sub-assembly.

ECCENTRIC SUB-ASSEMBLY
Set the curved link (53051) on a flat surface with the 3 tapped holes nearest you. Insert a 0-80 x 1/8” pan head screw (10208) into a 54020 bushing from the large end of the bushing. Insert the bushing into the small hole in an eccentric strap assembly (A2006) and screw it to the right end of the curved link. You will notice that the eccentric strap has a brass insert. Install the eccentric strap so that the side where the brass insert sticks out farther is facing down. The strap should extend towards you. Turn the curved link over and repeat with the other eccentric strap. The two straps will be attached at opposite ends of the curved link and on opposite sides of the link.
Start a 2-56 x 3/32” set screw (12606) in the hub of the eccentic with hub (53040). Set the eccentric on a flat surface with the hub down. Place the bottom eccentric strap over the eccentric.
Insert the eccentric without hub (53041) into the other eccentric strap from the top. Turn the assembly over. Connect the two eccentrics with a 0-80 x 1/4” pan head screw (10216) but do NOT tighten.
Line up the 3/16” holes in the two eccentrics and slide the crankshaft (A2010) through the holes to maintain alignment. Tighten the screw holding the two eccentrics together. Remove the crankshaft.
Remove any burrs on links 53046, 53049 and 53051 by rubbing them onto the flat face of a file.
Set the assembly on a flat surface with the hub facing up. Insert a 0-80 x 1/8” pan head screw (10208) through a 54003 bushing from the large end of the bushing. Insert the bushing and screw in one end of a 53046 link and attach to the curved link in the center hole.
Turn the assembly over. Insert bushing 54008) in one end of the other 53046 link. Insert a 0-80 x 3/16” pan head screw (10212) in the bushing from the link side and secure to the center hole of the curved link.
Set the assembly on a flat surface with the hub facing down and the eccentric strap big ends towards you. Adjust the two 53046 links to the right side. Screw handle (53048) into the side of the reversing lever (53047).
Insert the double ended bushing (54101) between the 53046 links engaging the two holes in the ends of the links. Insert a 0-80 x 3/8” pan head screw (10224) through the bushing. Place the reversing lever under the bottom link with the flat side up and secure the linkage to the reversing lever with the 0-80 screw.
This finishes the eccentric sub-assembly.

PARALLEL MOTION LINKAGE
Insert a 54003 BUSHING in the center hole of LINK 53050. Insert a 0-80 x 3/16” pan head screw (10212) in the bushing from the opposite side of the link that the bushing was inserted from. Insert the screw into the small hole in LINK (53049) and secure with a 0-80 NUT (10000).
Attach the linkage just assembled to the VALVE DRIVE BLOCK (A2005) by sliding the remaining ROUND hole in link 53050 over the short end of the pin extending from the valve drive block. The long link must be away from the valve drive block. Secure with a 0-80 x 1/8” pan head screw.
Screw the valve drive block to the valve spindle on the cylinder sub-assembly about 3 turns. Make sure you installed a 0-80 nut on the valve spindle before the previous step. Position the cylinder assembly so the steam chest is nearest you and the crosshead guide is down. Rotate the valve drive block so the links are nearest the crosshead guide. Position the links so the elongated hole in link 53050 is to your right and the long link is to your left.

FINAL ASSEMBLY
Remove any burrs from the standards (53053 and 53055). Attach the standards to the base (A2026) using (4) 2-56 x 5/16” pan head screws (12220). The bearing blocks on the base are at the front of the engine. With the bearing blocks away from you, standard 53053 (the standard with two 0-80 holes in it) will be on your left and the 0-80 tapped holes will be towards the bearing block end.
Insert a 54003 bushing into the elongated hole in link 53050 from the side of the link nearest the 53053 standard. Secure the link and bushing to the standard with a 0-80 x 1/8” pan head screw. Insert a 54003 bushing into the 53049 link from the side of the link away from the standard and secure to the upper hole in the 53055 standard using a 0-80 x 1/8” pan head screw (10208).
Position the eccentric assembly so the hub faces the steam chest and the curved link is up. Slide the eccentrics between the bearing blocks and engage the pin on the valve drive block into the curved slot.
Slide the 51006 washer on the crankshaft. Slide the crankshaft through the inside bearing (between the standards), the eccentrics and the outer bearing.
Insert bushing 51003 in the reversing lever and secure to the standard with a 0-80 x 3/16” pan head screw (10212). Make sure the lugs on the reversing lever fit on either side of the standard.



Layshaft Assembly
Press off bearings from the original layshaft using Raliart tool #MD998801, as shown in fig 2-1 and fig 2-2 and remove seals from the maincase bearing.
Build the layshaft assembly engaging MRA-235-17/25 Hub Gear (#28a), MRA-235-18/20 (#8a) and MRA-235-28/24 (#12a) gears onto the splined shaft MRA-234 (#10a). Secure the assembly by fitting circlip CIR-076 (#25).
Press the bearings retained from the original shaft onto the assembly and fit circlip FT-219-1A (#13).

Mainshaft Assembly
Use the fork setting fixture (SK-1698) to assist in assembling the mainshaft.
Place the mainshaft (MRA-221 - #9a) into the fork setting fixture (fig 3-1).
Slide mainshaft spacer MRA-221-1 (#16) onto the mainshaft (fig 3-2).
Place MRA-233-13/26 pinion gear (#10c) and bearing BEA-029 (#14) onto the smooth bore, splined, end of hub MRA-226 (#20) (fig 3-3a). Fit clutch ring DGB-232-S (#24) onto the hub external spline, completing the sub assembly by fitting MRA-233-12/36 pinion gear (#10b), and bearing BEA-029 (#14).
Engage the sub assembly onto the mainshaft splines, smooth bore side first (fig 3-3), followed by mainshaft hub spacer MRA-221-2 (#15) (fig 3-4).
Follow the same procedure for the sub assembly of MRA-233-17/25 pinion gear (#28b) and bearing BEA-029 (#14) onto the end of 3rd/4th hub ST-228 (#21).
Engage clutch ring DGB-232-S (#24) onto the hub external spline, completing the sub assembly by fittingMRA-233-18/20 pinion gear (#8b) and 3rd/4th hub ST-228 (#21).
Engage the sub assembly onto the mainshaft splines, MRA-233- 17/25 pinion gear (#28b) towards the final drive. Fit the second mainshaft hub spacer.MRA-221-2 (#15).
The same procedure is followed for the sub assembly of MRA-233-28/24 pinion gear (#12b) and bearing BEA-029 (#14) onto the end of hub MRA-228 (#22).
Engage clutch ring DGB-232-S (#24) onto the hub external spline, completing the sub assembly by fitting reverse pinion gear MRA-231 (#26), making sure the 5th gear is placed on the stepped end of 5th/REV hub MRA- 228 (#22) (fig 3-7a).
Engage the third hub onto the mainshaft with MRA-233-28:24 pinion gear (#12b) towards the final drive (fig 3-7).
Fit mainshaft spacer MRA-221-3 (#23) with its larger face towards the reverse gear (fig 3-8 and 3-8a).
Press the inner race of bearing BEA-148 (#17) up to the spacer and secure with circlip FT-219-1A (#13). Insert the oil seal (#19) in the mainshaft (fig 3-9).

Fork Setting
Insert the roller bearing BEA-099( #18) for the mainshaft into the clutch housing.
To obtain the correct end float/preload for both layshaft and mainshaft, follow the procedure as laid down on pages 22B-16 and 22B-17 of the Lancer Evo workshop manual (reproduced as Appendix D in this manual).
Place the correct shim (see Appendix E) and bearing BEA-148 (#17) into the mainshaft counterbore within the maincase (Fig 4-1).
Place a .040” (1.0mm) selector spacer MRA-246-1 (#27) onto 1st/2nd selector rod MRA-246 (#7) and fit fork MRA-250 (#6) without its key. Lightly lock in place with a plain M16 x 1.5 nut (10Nm torque).
Ensure the detent notches are facing away from the fork (Fig 4-2).
Engage the fork onto the clutch ring between 1st and 2nd gear on the main shaft. Holding the selector rod in place, lower the final drive shaft assembly into position in the maincase. At the same time guide the selector rod into its bore (Fig 4-3).
Fit the fork setting fixture over the final drive spigot on the mainshaft and selector rod. Using four (4) maincase bolts lightly secure the fixture (10Nm torque) (Fig 4-4).
Set the selector rod to the neutral position (centre notch) by looking through the detent hole and fit one of the original detents (Fig 4-5).
Using a mirror inspect the fork setting (Fig 4-6). The dogs on the clutch ring must be mid way between the dogs on the 1st and 2nd pinion gears. Should minor adjustments be necessary, the spacer MRA- 246-1 (#27) can either be ground to size, or replaced with a thicker spacer suitably ground to size.
Having obtained the correct fork setting, remove the mainshaft and set aside the selector rod and fork.
Follow the same procedure as above, using another .040”(1.0mm) spacer MRA-246-1 (#27) to assemble the 3rd/4th rod MRA-247-A (#4) and fork MRA-251(#5) (without its key). Having fitted the mainshaft, selector rod assembly and detent in place with the fixing jig.
As a guide, a .046”(1.15mm) spacer MRA-246-1 (#27) is required to fit the 5th/REV selector rod MRA-248 (#2) and fork MRA-252 (#3) . Build in the same way as the other rods (without its key) and fit the assembly, again with the aid of the fixing jig. Fork setting inspection can be made through the “sump plate” aperture adjacent to the reverse idler gear. Again, any adjustments must be made by grinding the spacer to the required size.
Remove the mainshaft and 5th/REV rod. Fit the appropriate keys (DG-256-6 (#29) and MRA-248 (#30))to each fork, and, using Fig 4-7 as a guide, lock each fork to its rod with NUT020 (#1) as illustrated.


GEARBOX P/N 001544
Installing Input Shaft and Gear, Install Front Bearing (item 3) into Main Housing (item 1) Bearing will install from back side of Housing.
Install Key (item 2) into Input Shaft, Slide input Gear (item 6) on to Shaft from front Side.
Install Input Seal into Main Housing from the Out Side or Seal can be installed later if wanted, If Seal is installed coat ID of Seal with light coat of Grease and also coat area on Shaft where Seal contacts Shaft.
Drop Input Shaft with Gear on it through Seal and Main Housing from the Back of Main Housing. Use caution not to damage Input Seal if it has been installed.
Insert Rear Cover O-Ring (item 18) into Housing and coat it with a light coat of grease. Push Rear Cover (item 16) into Housing, Cover is held in place by Shoulder Ring (item 17) which is installed now.
Installing Output Shaft (item 13), with Bearings and components as shown in Drawing into Main Housing (Item 1), install Input shaft before installing Output Shaft.
Install components onto Output Shaft (item 13), First slide the Shims (item 12) at top of Output Shaft under Gear on use the same quantity as was removed, Install Top Bearing (item 3) on till it seats against Shims.
Slide Lower Bearing Spacer (item 7) on Output Shaft, This Spacer has the OD same as the Bearings so it will be loose on Shaft. Put Lower Bearing (item 3) on Shaft til it seats against Bearing Spacer.
Install more Shims (item 12) on output shaft, Use same Quantity as was taken off. Install the External Snap ring (item 9) onto Output Shaft.
The Out out Shaft, Bearings, Shims, Bearing Spacer and Snap Ring should be all one assembly now. Slide this assembly up into Main Housing from the Bottom, It may be required to move Bearing spacer side to side to keep it lined up. Slide assembly in till upper Bearing bottoms out in Housing.
Install Lower Internal Snap Ring (item 8) into lower end of Main Housing, This retains Output Shaft and components. DO NOT install lower Seal at this Time.
Check Shaft for end Play and Gear Back-Lash, there should be no end play, If there is install more Shims (item 12) on Shaft, If Shaft is to tight use less Shims. Gear Back- Lash should be .016" to .019" if it is not then move Shims (item 12) from Top to Bottom or Bottom to Top, Where ever they are moved from they will have to go to the other end to keep End Play correct.
Install Lower Seal ( Item 11 Dust Shield), Coat Seal ID with light coat of grease, Install Shoulder Ring (item 10).
Fill Gearbox with oil. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. Wait a while let Gearbox sit and have time for Oil to run down into lower Bearings and recheck Oil Level. ALWAYS recheck Oil Level after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour. Inspect Seals for leaking after filling with Oil and after running 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00749003
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft) First, Install Bearings, Gears, Shafts and Components in Main Housing (item 1).
Inspect Main Housing (item 1), Front Bearing Cap (item 2), Rear Bearing Cap (item 4) and the two Side Drive Housings (item 5) for condition, this will include checking where Retaining Ring (item 9 & 10) are inserted in lower end (output Shaft area), All seal areas for Burrs or scratches that will cause Seals to Leak., Inspect all Bolt Holes and threads, Inspect all areas where Bearing Cups must seat.
Install Internal Snap Ring (item 10) into bottom and Internal Snap Ring (item 9) into Main Housing (item 1) lower opening for Output Shaft. Make sure they are seated in grooves completely.
Slide Lower Bearing Cup (item 34) thick end first into housing from the bottom, Cup should go in till it is seated against lower Retaining Ring (item 10). Slide Upper Bearing Cup (item 12) thick end first into opening from the top, it will slide it till it seats against upper Retaining Ring (item 9).
Slide Bearing Cone (item 35) down onto Output Blade Shaft (item 6) from the top (gear end) till it is seated against Shoulder at Bottom. Slide Blade Shaft (item 6) up into Main Housing from the bottom till lower Bearing Cone is seated into lower Bearing Cup. Slide the upper bearing Cone onto Blade Shaft from the top till it is seated into upper Bearing Cup. Slide the Blade Output Gear (item 44) down over Shaft from Top. Install washer (item 45) on shaft on top of Gear, Screw Slotted Nut (item 36) onto top of Blade Output Shaft.
Adjust Bearing Pre-Load in Blade Output Shaft by tightening the Slotted Nut (item 36). Set Pre- Load at 14" to 16" lbs of rolling torque, After Set use a coated Hammer or a Brass Drift Pin to tap Shaft to be sure Bearing Cones are seated in Bearing Cups and straight on Shaft, then recheck Bearing Pre-Load.
Coat Lower Seal (item 13) ID with a light coat of grease and install it into lower end of Main Housing. Drive Seal Protector (item 26) into lower end of Main Housing over Output Shaft.
Install Input Shaft (PTO) Second, Bearings, 2 Gears and Bearing Caps into Main Housing (item 1).
Install External Retaining Ring (item 24) onto Input Shaft (item 8), Install Output Gear (item 11) onto back side of Input Shaft till it seats against shoulder on shaft. Slide Inner Input Bearing Cone (item 17) onto back Side of input shaft till it seats against gear.
Bolt Rear Bearing Cap (item 4) with Shims (item 39 a/r) using Bolts (item 27) into back of Main Housing. Snug Bolts for now do not Torque them. from the Inside slide Inner Bearing Cup (item 16) into Housing till it seats against rear bearing cap. With Main Housing laying on its back, Stick one hand in through Side Shaft Housing opening so as you drop the Input shaft with rear gear & Bearing installed you can them on shaft while you slide it into housing. Slide Shaft in till Bearing Cone is seated in cup and shaft is in Bearing Cone as far as it will go.
Slide Input Gear (item 43) down over Input Shaft till it is bottomed out against External Retaining Ring (24) that was installed on shaft earlier. If Gear will not seat against Snap Ring check Number of Shims (item 39) used at rear Bearing Cap. Drop Outer Input Bearing Cone (item 15) down over input Shaft till it seats against Gear (item 43).
Install Outer Bearing Cup (item 14) into Front Bearing cap (item 2) using Shims (item 38 a/r) slide front bearing cap down over Input Shaft, Bolt (item 29) Bearing cap to front of Main Housing snug but do not torque go to step 13.
There are two adjustments that must be performed now, First is Bearing Pre-Load on Input shaft. Pre-Load should be 14" to 16" lbs of rolling Torque, this is done by adding or removing shims to front and/ or rear cover. DO NOT try to set Gear Back lash at this time leave it wide enough that the Bearing Pre-Load is not affected. When Bearing Pre-Load is correct it is time to set Gear Back- Lash, It will be set at .016" to .019", this is done by moving Shims, Example if more Back- Lash is needed remove a .007" Shim from rear Bearing cap and add a .007" Shim to front Bearing cap or Vice versa, if less Back-Lash is needed, But always add a shim to the opposite end when one is remove or added this will keep Bearing Pre-Load from changing. Tighten Retaining Bolts (item 24) on front Bearing cap & (Item 27) on rear bearing Cap and recheck settings.
Install Input Shaft front Seal (item 33) now, Coat the ID of Seal with Light coat of grease before installing into Bearing cap (item 2).
Install Side Output Shaft (Side Drive) Third & Fourth, Bearings, Gear into Side Drive Housings (item 5) and install Side Drive Housing Assembly into Main Housing (item 1), Left & Right Side Drive Housing Assemblies will Assemble the Same.
Install Inner Bearing Cup 22) and Outer Bearing Cup (item 20) into Side Drive Housing (item 5), Install bearing Cups till they are seated into Housing. Install Outer Bearing Cone (item 21) onto Side Drive Shaft (item 7) from gear end till it is seated against shoulder on shaft. Drop Shaft into Housing from gear Side. Slide inner Bearing Cone (item 23) onto Shaft from Gear end. Slide Gear (item 11) down on Shaft till seated against Bearing Cone. Install Washer (item 45) on shaft and Screw Slotted Nut (item 36) onto Shaft.
Tighten Nut till slack is removed from Shaft & Bearings, Using a coated Hammer and/or Brass Drift Pin and tap Shaft to make sure Bearings are seated. Tight Nut till you have a Bearing Pre- Load of 14" to 16" lbs of Rolling Torque, install Cotter Pin (item 19) into end of Shaft to retain Slotted Nut. Coat Side Drive Seal (item 25) ID with a light coat of grease and install it into Housing. Repeat this process for the other Side Drive Assembly.
When Installing the Side Drive Housing Assembly into the Main Housing Assembly use the Side Drive Housing Shims (item 37 a/r) to adjust Gear Back-Lash, More Shims will increase Back-Lash and Less Shims will decrease it. Set Gears (item 11) Back-Lash at .016" to .019" clearance.
Fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing and Side Drive Bearings, Then recheck and refill with Oil, DO NOT fill above Oil Level Plug, install Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00752140 & 00752140A 00752141 & 00752141A
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00752362).
Install Output shafts Upper Bearing Cup (#00748537) into upper portion of Main Housing, Also install inner Bearing Cup (# 00748525) for Input Shaft into Back side of Main Housing now. Install Upper Bearing Cone (00748522) onto top of Output Shaft, from the bottom of Main Housing Slide Output Shaft with upper Bearing Cone into Housing.
Slide Lower Bearing Cone (# 00748522) onto lower end of Out Put Shaft. Install Lower Bearing Cup (# 00020600) over Output Shaft and into Main Housing.
Inspect Lower Bearing Cap (# 00752155) at seal Area to be sure there are no Burrs or Scratches and if there are remove them. Install Output Seal (# 00748519) into Lower Bearing Retainer Cap, Coat ID of Seal with a light coat of Grease.
Using Shims (#00748520) Install the Lower Bearing Retainer Cap use quantity of Shims as required to Set Bearing Pre-Load to 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque, After Set remove bearing cap and coat Shims with Gasket Sealer reinstall & Check Bearing Pre-Load.
Go to the Top of the Out put Shaft and install the Output Gear (# 00755506) on top of shaft, This gear will sit on shaft without any holdown.
Install Input Shaft, You should already have inner Bearing Cup (# 00748527) installed into back of Main Housing (# 00752362). Take Input Shaft (# 00752363) and install a Snap Ring (# 00748526) in Groove near inner Bearing area. Install Another Snap Ring (# 00748526) on Shaft at gear end. Note there are a number of grooves in Shaft for snap Rings, Make Sure they are installed in the correct grooves that they came out of.
With Gearbox Housing laying on its back drop the Inner Bearing Cone into Main Housing, Slide Input Shaft into Bearing.
Gearbox 00752140 / 00752140A Slide Input Gear (# 00755506) onto Input Shaft, Slide Gear Spacer (# 00748533) onto Input Shaft till it seats against gear. Slide Outer Input Bearing Cone (00748527) down over Input shaft. Gearbox 00752141 & 00752141A Gear, Spacer & Snap ring will install on Back Side of input Shaft to rear of main housing.
Inspect Bearing Cap (# 00752365) for burrs or scratches at Seal area. If OK Install Outer Input shaft Bearing into Bearing Retaining Cap (#00752365), Install Input Seal (# 00748536) into Bearing Cap. Coat ID of Seal with a light coat of grease, and coat input shaft are where seal runs with light coat of grease.
Using Shims (# 00748531) Slide Input Bearing retaining Cap down over Input Shaft, The number of shims required will vary. Tighten Bolts that hold Bearing Cap and Check Pre-Load and Gear Back-Lash, Remove or add Shims as required. Bearing Pre-Load should be 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque. Gear Back-Lash should be .017" to .019", remove or add Shims as required.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00753190
Install Center Input / Output Shaft (item 13), with Rear Bearings, Gear and components as shown in Drawing into Main Housing (Item 12), install Input shaft before installing Output Shafts to Wings, Notice Item 15, these are compensating washer to keep end play out of Shaft. there may be one ore more used.
Install Snap Ring (Item 17) in Back of Housing (Item 12), this will retain Rear bearing (item 21) DO NOT INSTALL REAR SEAL YET. Install Front Spacer Washer (item 15) and front Bearing with its components., Install Front Snap Ring (Item 17) DO NOT INSTALL FRONT SEAL YET. Check Input shaft for End Play, If there is no end play Still DO NOT Install any seal at this time. Front and Rear Seal can be installed at this time, If there is end Play it may be required to remove or Add Washers (item # 15). IMPORTANT Remember these are Ball Bearings and you DO NOT Pre-Load Ball Bearings.
Looking down into Gearbox Housing you will see casting part for Inner Bearing on Output Shafts to Wings. Install Inner Bearing (item 3) with Compensating Rings (item 7) as needed. put gear down into Housing, Insert Shaft from outside into housing. Insert Shims and outer Bearing (item 3). To set Backlash on gears it may be required to add or remove Compensating Rings (item 7) to move Gear closer or further away from center Gear. The Gear Back lash should be .014" to .016" and shafts should NOT have End Play. Make sure of all parts install and gear Back Lash is correct, If Shaft has end Play but Back Lash is correct the end Play can be removed by adding or removing outer bearing washer (item 2). Both Side Drive Output Shafts will install the same way.
To Install Input and Output Seals into Main Housing. BEFORE installing Seals check Housing where seal installs to make sure the opening HAS NO burrs or scratches, The outer edge of opening can get sharp edges on it from installing the previous Seal. These sharp edges will cut outer edge of Seal, if these burrs or sharp edge are not removed Seals may leak, If this happens look for a group of scratches that run across the outer edge of seal when removed. To install the Seals it is best to use a Seal driver of the right size. Shaft area and inner ID of Seal should be coated with light coat of grease before installing.
Install top cover using Gasket or Gasket sealer, Fill Gearbox with oil. Gearbox can be filled with oil before top cover is installed if wanted. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. ALWAYS recheck Oil Level after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour. Inspect Seals for leaking after filling with Oil and after running 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00754005
Install Center Input / Output Shaft (item 13), with Rear Bearings, Gear and components as shown in Drawing into Main Housing (Item 12), install Input shaft before installing Output Shafts to Wings, Notice Item 15, these are compensating washer to keep end play out of Shaft. there may be one ore more used.
Install Snap Ring (Item 17) in Back of Housing (Item 12), this will retain Rear bearing (item 21) DO NOT INSTALL REAR SEAL YET. Install Front Spacer Washer (item 15) and front Bearing with its components., Install Front Snap Ring (Item 17) DO NOT INSTALL FRONT SEAL YET. Check Input shaft for End Play, If there is no end play Still DO NOT Install any seal at this time. Front and Rear Seal can be installed at this time, If there is end Play it may be required to remove or Add Washers (item # 15). IMPORTANT Remember these are Ball Bearings and you DO NOT Pre-Load Ball Bearings.
Looking down into Gearbox Housing you will see casting part for Inner Bearing on Output Shafts to Wings. Install Inner Bearing (item 3) with Compensating Rings (item 7) as needed. put gear down into Housing, Insert Shaft from outside into housing. Insert Shims and outer Bearing (item 3). To set Backlash on gears it may be required to add or remove Compensating Rings (item 7) to move Gear closer or further away from center Gear. The Gear Back lash should be .014" to .016" and shafts should NOT have End Play. Make sure of all parts install and gear Back Lash is correct, If Shaft has end Play but Back Lash is correct the end Play can be removed by adding or removing outer bearing washer (item 2). Both Side Drive Output Shafts will install the same way.
To Install Input and Output Seals into Main Housing. BEFORE installing Seals check Housing where seal installs to make sure the opening HAS NO burrs or scratches, The outer edge of opening can get sharp edges on it from installing the previous Seal. These sharp edges will cut outer edge of Seal, if these burrs or sharp edge are not removed Seals may leak, If this happens look for a group of scratches that run across the outer edge of seal when removed. To install the Seals it is best to use a Seal driver of the right size. Shaft area and inner ID of Seal should be coated with light coat of grease before installing.
Install top cover using Gasket or Gasket sealer, Fill Gearbox with oil. Gearbox can be filled with oil before top cover is installed if wanted. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. ALWAYS recheck Oil Level after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour. Inspect Seals for leaking after filling with Oil and after running 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00755566
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00755613).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (#00755613) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (#00755628) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (#00755622) down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (#00755630) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Insert Shim (#00755638 washer) down against gear, Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00756943) onto top of Out put Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then secure Bearing Adjusting Nut with Cotter Pin.
DO NOT Install Output Seal (#00755627) now, wait till Input Shaft has been installed, When you do install it Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Install Seal Protector (#00755626), this drives into lower Main Housing, This Seal Protector Should always be replaced with new one after being removed. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Output Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque. (See 5.).
Install Input Shaft, Bearings and Gear into Main Housing (#00755613).
Install External Clip (#00755620) on Input Shaft (#00755617) next to where Gear goes. Install External Clip (#00755632) on Input Shaft next to rear Bearing area. Drop Input Gear (#00756899) into Gearbox Main Housing from the top. Holding Gear in-place insert Input Shaft into Main Housing from the rear through rear Bearing opening on center and left wing Gearbox, from the front on Right wing Gearbox. Slide shaft guiding it through input Gear. slide Shaft in till External Clip is against Gear.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing till it is against External Clip on Shaft. Install Bearing Cup (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into rear of main housing, Install Shims (#00755619) in against Bearing Cup try to use the same amount of shims as were removed. Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time. Install Front Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) onto Input Shaft from the front till they are against Input Gear. Install Shims against Bearing Cup, Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into front of Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Add or remove shims from Input Shaft Bearings will change Bearing Pre-Load, Move Shim from one side of input Bearing to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Install Input Seal (#00755616) and Rear Seal Cap (#00755634) then recheck Gear and Bearing settings. Now is the time to install Output seal and lower seal protector, (see step 6).
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket), Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00755598
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00755613).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (#00755613) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (#00755628) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (#00755622) down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (#00755630) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Insert Shim (#00755638 washer) down against gear, Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00755621) onto top of Out put Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then secure Bearing Adjusting Nut with Cotter Pin.
DO NOT Install Output Seal (#00755627) now, wait till Input Shaft has been installed, When you do install it Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Install Seal Protector (#00755626), this drives into lower Main Housing, This Seal Protector Should always be replaced with new one after being removed. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Output Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque. (See 5.).
Install Input Shaft, Bearings and Gear into Main Housing (#00755613).
Install External Clip (#00755620) on Input Shaft (#00755617) next to where Gear goes. Install External Clip (#00755632) on Input Shaft next to rear Bearing area. Drop Input Gear (#00755614) into Gearbox Main Housing from the top. Holding Gear in-place insert Input Shaft into Main Housing from the rear through rear Bearing opening on center and left wing Gearbox, from the front on Right wing Gearbox. Slide shaft guiding it through input Gear. slide Shaft in till External Clip is against Gear.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing till it is against External Clip on Shaft. Install Bearing Cup (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into rear of main housing, Install Shims (#00755619) in against Bearing Cup try to use the same amount of shims as were removed. Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time. Install Front Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) onto Input Shaft from the front till they are against Input Gear. Install Shims against Bearing Cup, Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into front of Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Add or remove shims from Input Shaft Bearings will change Bearing Pre-Load, Move Shim from one side of input Bearing to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Install Input Seal (#00755616) and Rear Seal Cap (#00755634) then recheck Gear and Bearing settings. Now is the time to install Output seal and lower seal protector, (see step 6).
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket), Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00755697A
Install Center Input / Output Shaft (item 14), with Bearings, Gear and components as shown in Drawing into Main Housing (Item 9), install Input shaft before installing Output Shafts to Wings, Notice Item 12, these are Shim Washers (Compensating Rings) to keep end play out of Shaft. there may be one ore more used. DO NOT INSTALL ANY SEALS TILL GEARBOX IS COMPLETLY ASSEMBLED ! Before you install the seals check the openings for burrs or scratches that will damage or prevent the OD of the seal from sealing. Remove any Burrs and fill scratch with good gasket Sealer.
Install Snap Ring (Item 10) in Back of Housing (Item 9), this will retain Rear bearing (item 16) DO NOT install Rear Seal (item 11) at this time. Install Front Shims (item 12), Qty use same as was removed as this amount can vary. Slide rear Bearing (item 16) into housing (item 9) this can be done from inside. Push Bearing in till it seats against the Shims & Snap Ring (items 10 & 12).
Holding Input Gear (item 17) into Gearbox Housing (item 9) from the top slide the Input Shaft (item 14) into the Housing from the front. Slide Shaft through Gear and Rear Bearing.
Install Front Bearing (item 13) on input Shaft from the front. Slide Bearing till it goes into Gearbox Housing and seats against Shoulder on Input Shaft. Install Shims (item 12) using quantity that will will allow end play to be removed, This is a trial & error method because you will need to install Snap Ring (item 10) to check then remove it to add or remove Shims. These are ball Bearings so they will not have Pre-Load. DO NOT install Front Seal (item 11) at this time.
Install Output Shaft to Side Drives, The Left & Right Shafts will install the Same using the same Part Numbers. it is best to install Parts for both Side Drive Shafts at same time.
Looking down into gearbox Housing (item 9) you can see the inner casting for the Inner Bearing (item 7), There will be adjusting Shims (item 8) that need to be installed here before Bearing is. The quantity of Shims will vary, Try the same amount as was removed here. Install the inner Bearing (item 7) into Housing.
Side Output Shaft (item 1) has a Snap Ring Grove on it near outer Bearing (item 5)area. Slide Outer Bearing (item 5) onto Side Shaft (item 1) till it seats against Shoulder on Shaft. Install Snap Ring (item 22) on Shaft next to Bearing.
Take the Gear for Side Drive (item 6) and slide it down into Gearbox from the Top, With the side Drive Gear in position against the Input Gear (item 17), take the Side drive Shaft (item 1) and Slide it through the Housing from the out side, rotating Shaft as you push it through to align Splines on shaft with spline in Gear. Push the Shaft in till the Bearing is into Housing and the shoulder on Shaft seats against inner Bearing.
From the outside install Shims in against Outer Bearing, use quantity to remove end play, install Snap Ring (item 4) to retain Components of Side Out put Shaft. DO NOT install Seals at this time.
it is now time to check Gear Back-Lash and Seating of gears Heal to Toe, The Back -Lash and Seating of gears can be changed by moving Shims (item 12) on center Shaft and (item 8) on Side Drive Shafts. this is a trial & error Method of adding & removing Shims. Do This till the Gear Back Lash is .016" to .019" and Gear seating is even Heal to Toe.
Coat all Shafts & ID of seals with alight coat of Grease before installing Seals. Install Seals Now, if the openings for the seals have not been inspected as explained in Step 1, do so now before installing Seals.
Install top cover using Gasket sealer, Fill Gearbox with oil. Gearbox can be filled with oil before top cover is installed if wanted. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. Always check for Oil Leaks before Running Mower and Always recheck Oil Level, Inspect Seals for Leaking, Excessive end play in Shaft after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00755698
Install Center Input / Output Shaft (item 13), with Rear Bearings, Gear and components as shown in Drawing into Main Housing (Item 12), install Input shaft before installing Output Shafts to Wings, Notice Item 15, these are compensating washer to keep end play out of Shaft. there may be one ore more used.
Install Snap Ring (Item 17) in Back of Housing (Item 12), this will retain Rear bearing (item 21) DO NOT INSTALL REAR SEAL YET. Install Front Spacer Washer (item 15) and front Bearing with its components., Install Front Snap Ring (Item 17) DO NOT INSTALL FRONT SEAL YET. Check Input shaft for End Play, If there is no end play Still DO NOT Install any seal at this time. Front and Rear Seal can be installed at this time, If there is end Play it may be required to remove or Add Washers (item # 15). IMPORTANT Remember these are Ball Bearings and you DO NOT Pre-Load Ball Bearings.
Looking down into Gearbox Housing you will see casting part for Inner Bearing on Output Shafts to Wings. Install Inner Bearing (item 3) with Compensating Rings (item 7) as needed. put gear down into Housing, Insert Shaft from outside into housing. Insert Shims and outer Bearing (item 3). To set Backlash on gears it may be required to add or remove Compensating Rings (item 7) to move Gear closer or further away from center Gear. The Gear Back lash should be .014" to .016" and shafts should NOT have End Play. Make sure of all parts install and gear Back Lash is correct, If Shaft has end Play but Back Lash is correct the end Play can be removed by adding or removing outer bearing washer (item 2). Both Side Drive Output Shafts will install the same way.
To Install Input and Output Seals into Main Housing. BEFORE installing Seals check Housing where seal installs to make sure the opening HAS NO burrs or scratches, The outer edge of opening can get sharp edges on it from installing the previous Seal. These sharp edges will cut outer edge of Seal, if these burrs or sharp edge are not removed Seals may leak, If this happens look for a group of scratches that run across the outer edge of seal when removed. To install the Seals it is best to use a Seal driver of the right size. Shaft area and inner ID of Seal should be coated with light coat of grease before installing.
Install top cover using Gasket or Gasket sealer, Fill Gearbox with oil. Gearbox can be filled with oil before top cover is installed if wanted. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. ALWAYS recheck Oil Level after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour. Inspect Seals for leaking after filling with Oil and after running 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00756603A
Install Center Input / Output Shaft (item 14), with Bearings, Gear and components as shown in Drawing into Main Housing (Item 9), install Input shaft before installing Output Shafts to Wings, Notice Item 12, these are Shim Washers (Compensating Rings) to keep end play out of Shaft. there may be one ore more used. DO NOT INSTALL ANY SEALS TILL GEARBOX IS COMPLETLY ASSEMBLED ! Before you install the seals check the openings for burrs or scratches that will damage or prevent the OD of the seal from sealing. Remove any Burrs and fill scratch with good gasket Sealer.
Install Snap Ring (Item 10) in Back of Housing (Item 9), this will retain Rear bearing (item 16) DO NOT install Rear Seal (item 11) at this time. Install Front Shims (item 12), Qty use same as was removed as this amount can vary. Slide rear Bearing (item 16) into housing (item 9) this can be done from inside. Push Bearing in till it seats against the Shims & Snap Ring (items 10 & 12).
Holding Input Gear (item 17) into Gearbox Housing (item 9) from the top slide the Input Shaft (item 14) into the Housing from the front. Slide Shaft through Gear and Rear Bearing.
Install Front Bearing (item 13) on input Shaft from the front. Slide Bearing till it goes into Gearbox Housing and seats against Shoulder on Input Shaft. Install Shims (item 12) using quantity that will will allow end play to be removed, This is a trial & error method because you will need to install Snap Ring (item 10) to check then remove it to add or remove Shims. These are ball Bearings so they will not have Pre-Load. DO NOT install Front Seal (item 11) at this time.
Install Output Shaft to Side Drives, The Left & Right Shafts will install the Same using the same Part Numbers. it is best to install Parts for both Side Drive Shafts at same time.
Looking down into gearbox Housing (item 9) you can see the inner casting for the Inner Bearing (item 7), There will be adjusting Shims (item 8) that need to be installed here before Bearing is. The quantity of Shims will vary, Try the same amount as was removed here. Install the inner Bearing (item 7) into Housing.
Side Output Shaft (item 1) has a Snap Ring Grove on it near outer Bearing (item 5)area. Slide Outer Bearing (item 5) onto Side Shaft (item 1) till it seats against Shoulder on Shaft. Install Snap Ring (item 22) on Shaft next to Bearing.
Take the Gear for Side Drive (item 6) and slide it down into Gearbox from the Top, With the side Drive Gear in position against the Input Gear (item 17), take the Side drive Shaft (item 1) and Slide it through the Housing from the out side, rotating Shaft as you push it through to align Splines on shaft with spline in Gear. Push the Shaft in till the Bearing is into Housing and the shoulder on Shaft seats against inner Bearing.
From the outside install Shims in against Outer Bearing, use quantity to remove end play, install Snap Ring (item 4) to retain Components of Side Out put Shaft. DO NOT install Seals at this time.
it is now time to check Gear Back-Lash and Seating of gears Heal to Toe, The Back -Lash and Seating of gears can be changed by moving Shims (item 12) on center Shaft and (item 8) on Side Drive Shafts. this is a trial & error Method of adding & removing Shims. Do This till the Gear Back Lash is .016" to .019" and Gear seating is even Heal to Toe.
Coat all Shafts & ID of seals with alight coat of Grease before installing Seals. Install Seals Now, if the openings for the seals have not been inspected as explained in Step 1, do so now before installing Seals.
Install top cover using Gasket sealer, Fill Gearbox with oil. Gearbox can be filled with oil before top cover is installed if wanted. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. Always check for Oil Leaks before Running Mower and Always recheck Oil Level, Inspect Seals for Leaking, Excessive end play in Shaft after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00756604
Install Center Input / Output Shaft (item 13), with Rear Bearings, Gear and components as shown in Drawing into Main Housing (Item 12), install Input shaft before installing Output Shafts to Wings, Notice Item 15, these are compensating washer to keep end play out of Shaft. there may be one ore more used.
Install Snap Ring (Item 17) in Back of Housing (Item 12), this will retain Rear bearing (item 21) DO NOT INSTALL REAR SEAL YET. Install Front Spacer Washer (item 15) and front Bearing with its components., Install Front Snap Ring (Item 17) DO NOT INSTALL FRONT SEAL YET. Check Input shaft for End Play, If there is no end play Still DO NOT Install any seal at this time. Front and Rear Seal can be installed at this time, If there is end Play it may be required to remove or Add Washers (item # 15). IMPORTANT Remember these are Ball Bearings and you DO NOT Pre-Load Ball Bearings.
Looking down into Gearbox Housing you will see casting part for Inner Bearing on Output Shafts to Wings. Install Inner Bearing (item 3) with Compensating Rings (item 7) as needed. put gear down into Housing, Insert Shaft from outside into housing. Insert Shims and outer Bearing (item 3). To set Backlash on gears it may be required to add or remove Compensating Rings (item 7) to move Gear closer or further away from center Gear. The Gear Back lash should be .014" to .016" and shafts should NOT have End Play. Make sure of all parts install and gear Back Lash is correct, If Shaft has end Play but Back Lash is correct the end Play can be removed by adding or removing outer bearing washer (item 2). Both Side Drive Output Shafts will install the same way.
To Install Input and Output Seals into Main Housing. BEFORE installing Seals check Housing where seal installs to make sure the opening HAS NO burrs or scratches, The outer edge of opening can get sharp edges on it from installing the previous Seal. These sharp edges will cut outer edge of Seal, if these burrs or sharp edge are not removed Seals may leak, If this happens look for a group of scratches that run across the outer edge of seal when removed. To install the Seals it is best to use a Seal driver of the right size. Shaft area and inner ID of Seal should be coated with light coat of grease before installing.
Install top cover using Gasket or Gasket sealer, Fill Gearbox with oil. Gearbox can be filled with oil before top cover is installed if wanted. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. ALWAYS recheck Oil Level after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour. Inspect Seals for leaking after filling with Oil and after running 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00756622
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00755613).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (#00755613) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (#00755628) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (#00755622) down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (#00756899) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Insert Shim (#00755638 washer) down against gear, Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00756943) onto top of Out put Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then secure Bearing Adjusting Nut with Cotter Pin.
DO NOT Install Output Seal (#00755627) now, wait till Input Shaft has been installed, When you do install it Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Install Seal Protector (#00755626), this drives into lower Main Housing, This Seal Protector Should always be replaced with new one after being removed. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Output Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque. (See 5.).
Install Input Shaft, Bearings and Gear into Main Housing (#00755613).
Install External Clip (#00755620) on Input Shaft (#00755617) next to where Gear goes. Install External Clip (#00755632) on Input Shaft next to rear Bearing area. Drop Input Gear (#00756900) into Gearbox Main Housing from the top. Holding Gear in-place insert Input Shaft into Main Housing from the rear through rear Bearing opening on center and left wing Gearbox, from the front on Right wing Gearbox. Slide shaft guiding it through input Gear. slide Shaft in till External Clip is against Gear.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing till it is against External Clip on Shaft. Install Bearing Cup (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into rear of main housing, Install Shims (#00755619) in against Bearing Cup try to use the same amount of shims as were removed. Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time. Install Front Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) onto Input Shaft from the front till they are against Input Gear. Install Shims against Bearing Cup, Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into front of Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Add or remove shims from Input Shaft Bearings will change Bearing Pre-Load, Move Shim from one side of input Bearing to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Install Input Seal (#00755616) and Rear Seal Cap (#00755634) then recheck Gear and Bearing settings. Now is the time to install Output seal and lower seal protector, (see step 6).
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket), Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00756624
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00755613).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (#00755613) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (#00755628) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (#00755622) down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (#00756899) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Insert Shim (#00755638 washer) down against gear, Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00756943) onto top of Out put Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then secure Bearing Adjusting Nut with Cotter Pin.
DO NOT Install Output Seal (#00755627) now, wait till Input Shaft has been installed, When you do install it Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Install Seal Protector (#00755626), this drives into lower Main Housing, This Seal Protector Should always be replaced with new one after being removed. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Output Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque. (See 5.).
Install Input Shaft, Bearings and Gear into Main Housing (#00755613).
Install External Clip (#00755620) on Input Shaft (#00755617) next to where Gear goes. Install External Clip (#00755632) on Input Shaft next to rear Bearing area. Drop Input Gear (#00756900) into Gearbox Main Housing from the top. Holding Gear in-place insert Input Shaft into Main Housing from the rear through rear Bearing opening on center and left wing Gearbox, from the front on Right wing Gearbox. Slide shaft guiding it through input Gear. slide Shaft in till External Clip is against Gear.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing till it is against External Clip on Shaft. Install Bearing Cup (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into rear of main housing, Install Shims (#00755619) in against Bearing Cup try to use the same amount of shims as were removed. Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time. Install Front Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) onto Input Shaft from the front till they are against Input Gear. Install Shims against Bearing Cup, Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into front of Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Add or remove shims from Input Shaft Bearings will change Bearing Pre-Load, Move Shim from one side of input Bearing to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Install Input Seal (#00755616) and Rear Seal Cap (#00755634) then recheck Gear and Bearing settings. Now is the time to install Output seal and lower seal protector, (see step 6).
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket), Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00756739
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00755613).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (#00755613) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (#00755628) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (#00755622) down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (#00756900) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Insert Shim (#00755638 washer) down against gear, Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00756943) onto top of Out put Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then secure Bearing Adjusting Nut with Cotter Pin.
DO NOT Install Output Seal (#00755627) now, wait till Input Shaft has been installed, When you do install it Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Install Seal Protector (#00755626), this drives into lower Main Housing, This Seal Protector Should always be replaced with new one after being removed. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Output Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque. (See 5.).
Install Input Shaft, Bearings and Gear into Main Housing (#00755613).
Install External Clip (#00755620) on Input Shaft (#00755617) next to where Gear goes. Install External Clip (#00755632) on Input Shaft next to rear Bearing area. Drop Input Gear (#00756899) into Gearbox Main Housing from the top. Holding Gear in-place insert Input Shaft into Main Housing from the rear through rear Bearing opening on center and left wing Gearbox, from the front on Right wing Gearbox. Slide shaft guiding it through input Gear. slide Shaft in till External Clip is against Gear.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing till it is against External Clip on Shaft. Install Bearing Cup (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into rear of main housing, Install Shims (#00755619) in against Bearing Cup try to use the same amount of shims as were removed. Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time. Install Front Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) onto Input Shaft from the front till they are against Input Gear. Install Shims against Bearing Cup, Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into front of Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Add or remove shims from Input Shaft Bearings will change Bearing Pre-Load, Move Shim from one side of input Bearing to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Install Input Seal (#00755616) and Rear Seal Cap (#00755634) then recheck Gear and Bearing settings. Now is the time to install Output seal and lower seal protector, (see step 6).
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket), Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00756741
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00755613).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (#00755613) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (#00755628) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (#00755622) down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (#00756900) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Insert Shim (#00755638 washer) down against gear, Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00756943) onto top of Out put Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then secure Bearing Adjusting Nut with Cotter Pin.
DO NOT Install Output Seal (#00755627) now, wait till Input Shaft has been installed, When you do install it Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Install Seal Protector (#00755626), this drives into lower Main Housing, This Seal Protector Should always be replaced with new one after being removed. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Output Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque. (See 5.).
Install Input Shaft, Bearings and Gear into Main Housing (#00755613).
Install External Clip (#00755620) on Input Shaft (#00755617) next to where Gear goes. Install External Clip (#00755632) on Input Shaft next to rear Bearing area. Drop Input Gear (#00756899) into Gearbox Main Housing from the top. Holding Gear in-place insert Input Shaft into Main Housing from the rear through rear Bearing opening on center and left wing Gearbox, from the front on Right wing Gearbox. Slide shaft guiding it through input Gear. slide Shaft in till External Clip is against Gear.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing till it is against External Clip on Shaft. Install Bearing Cup (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into rear of main housing, Install Shims (#00755619) in against Bearing Cup try to use the same amount of shims as were removed. Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time. Install Front Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) onto Input Shaft from the front till they are against Input Gear. Install Shims against Bearing Cup, Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into front of Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Add or remove shims from Input Shaft Bearings will change Bearing Pre-Load, Move Shim from one side of input Bearing to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Install Input Seal (#00755616) and Rear Seal Cap (#00755634) then recheck Gear and Bearing settings. Now is the time to install Output seal and lower seal protector, (see step 6).
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket), Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00756744
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00755613).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (#00755613) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (#00755628) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (#00755622) down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (#00756944) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Insert Shim (#00755638 washer) down against gear, Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00756943) onto top of Out put Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then secure Bearing Adjusting Nut with Cotter Pin.
DO NOT Install Output Seal (#00755627) now, wait till Input Shaft has been installed, When you do install it Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Install Seal Protector (#00755626), this drives into lower Main Housing, This Seal Protector Should always be replaced with new one after being removed. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Output Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque. (See 5.).
Install Input Shaft, Bearings and Gear into Main Housing (#00755613).
Install External Clip (#00755620) on Input Shaft (#00755617) next to where Gear goes. Install External Clip (#00755632) on Input Shaft next to rear Bearing area. Drop Input Gear (#00756942) into Gearbox Main Housing from the top. Holding Gear in-place insert Input Shaft into Main Housing from the rear through rear Bearing opening on center and left wing Gearbox, from the front on Right wing Gearbox. Slide shaft guiding it through input Gear. slide Shaft in till External Clip is against Gear.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing till it is against External Clip on Shaft. Install Bearing Cup (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into rear of main housing, Install Shims (#00755619) in against Bearing Cup try to use the same amount of shims as were removed. Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time. Install Front Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) onto Input Shaft from the front till they are against Input Gear. Install Shims against Bearing Cup, Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into front of Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Add or remove shims from Input Shaft Bearings will change Bearing Pre-Load, Move Shim from one side of input Bearing to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Install Input Seal (#00755616) and Rear Seal Cap (#00755634) then recheck Gear and Bearing settings. Now is the time to install Output seal and lower seal protector, (see step 6).
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket), Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00757825
Install Input Shaft (Center Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758644) install Input shaft before Output Shafts to Wings.
Install Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) in Main Housing and Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) in front Bearing Carrier Cap (#00758664), Drive Cups in till they bottom out, Check this before continuing. Then Lay Bearing Carrier Cap aside for now.
Install Gear Spacer (#00758657) onto Input Shaft, Slide Gear (#00758656 (23 tooth) 540 rpm or #00758670 (20 tooth) 1000 rpm)) onto Input Shaft making sure gear is against Gear Spacer, If Gear is put on backward the assemblies for Wing Output won't fit. Next install Inner Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) and outer Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) on to Shaft making sure inner bearing is bottomed out against gear and outer Bearing Cone is against shoulder on Input Shaft.
Install Seal (#00758653) into Bearing Carrier Cap and Seal (#00758653) into rear of Main Housing. Coat ID of Seals with light coat of Grease, using Shims (DO NOT put Gasket Sealer on Shims at this time) Tighten down Bearing Carrier Cap and check Bearing Pre- Load, It should be 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque, Shaft should not have any end play in or out. If less Pre-Load is needed remove Shims if more is needed add shims. If Bearing Pre-Load is right, remove Bearing Carrier Cap and coat shims with Sealer and re-install, Tighten Bolts and Recheck Bearing Pre-Load.
When this has been Done go on to Step 2, Installing Wing Output Shaft Assembly with Gear. The Gear Backlash will be set at .017" to .019".
Install Output Shaft Asy, Bearings, Gear (Output) in Horizontal Hub Housing (#00758649) Always install Center Input Shaft in Main Housing first, see step 1.
Install Outer Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone) and Inner Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone) into Horizontal Hub Housing (#00758649), (inner cup near gear and one outer cup near seal), They are the same and can be installed inner or outer Cup, Install cups in Housing till they bottom out against shoulders in Housing.
Install Inner Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) onto Output Shaft (# 00757895), Make sure Bearing is seated down against on shaft far enough that Gear can be installed. Install Gear (#00758645 (20 tooth) 540 rpm or #00758669 (26 tooth) 1000 rpm).
Install Snap Ring (#00758660) onto Output Shaft (#00758658) this holds gear on Shaft. Insert Shaft with Gear and Bearing on into Horizontal Housing. Install Outer Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) over Output Shaft and into Housing till it seats against Outer Bearing Cup. Screw Bearing Adjusting Nut onto Output Shaft till it touches Bearing Cone. Continue to tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling torque. Tap Shaft with a Hammer and recheck Bearing Pre-Load, If it is correct Stake Adjusting Nut to Shaft by Bend top of Nut into Groove on Shaft, this will prevent Nut from turning and loosening up.
Install Seal (#00758653) into Seal Adapter (#00758652) coat OD of adapter with gasket sealer and ID of Seal with light coat of grease and install Seal Adapter into Horizontal Hub Housing.
To Install Output Shaft Housing Assemblies into Main Housing. (DO NOT USE any Gasket sealer at this time) Put Shims and Gasket on Output Housing Assembly and insert it into Main Housing, These shim are used to set Backlash on Gears. Backlash is changed by adding or removing Shims. Tighten Bolts and check Gear Backlash, It should be .017" to .019". When Gear Backlash is correct, Remove Bolts and put Gasket sealer on Gaskets, reinstall Bolts and Lockwashers and tighten down.
After both Horizontal Hub Assemblies have been installed, Install To fill Gearbox full of Oil. Fill till Oil runs out of oil level plug in side of gearbox housing. Insert Plugs, oil level plug on side and Vent plug on top. ALWAYS wait enough time for Oil to run in between Inner and Out Bearings on Out Put Shaft Assemblies before deciding Oil Level is Full. After running mower for 30 minutes to an hour always recheck oil level.

GEARBOX P/N 00757826
Install Input Shaft (Center Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758644) install Input shaft before Output Shafts to Wings.
Install Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) in Main Housing and Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) in front Bearing Carrier Cap (#00758664), Drive Cups in till they bottom out, Check this before continuing. Then Lay Bearing Carrier Cap aside for now.
Install Gear Spacer (#00758657) onto Input Shaft, Slide Gear (#00758656 (23 tooth) 540 rpm or #00758670 (20 tooth) 1000 rpm)) onto Input Shaft making sure gear is against Gear Spacer, If Gear is put on backward the assemblies for Wing Output won't fit. Next install Inner Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) and outer Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) on to Shaft making sure inner bearing is bottomed out against gear and outer Bearing Cone is against shoulder on Input Shaft.
Install Seal (#00758653) into Bearing Carrier Cap and Seal (#00758653) into rear of Main Housing. Coat ID of Seals with light coat of Grease, using Shims (DO NOT put Gasket Sealer on Shims at this time) Tighten down Bearing Carrier Cap and check Bearing Pre- Load, It should be 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque, Shaft should not have any end play in or out. If less Pre-Load is needed remove Shims if more is needed add shims. If Bearing Pre-Load is right, remove Bearing Carrier Cap and coat shims with Sealer and re-install, Tighten Bolts and Recheck Bearing Pre-Load.
When this has been Done go on to Step 2, Installing Wing Output Shaft Assembly with Gear. The Gear Backlash will be set at .017" to .019".
Install Output Shaft Asy, Bearings, Gear (Output) in Horizontal Hub Housing (#00758649) Always install Center Input Shaft in Main Housing first, see step 1.
Install Outer Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone) and Inner Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone) into Horizontal Hub Housing (#00758649), (inner cup near gear and one outer cup near seal), They are the same and can be installed inner or outer Cup, Install cups in Housing till they bottom out against shoulders in Housing.
Install Inner Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) onto Output Shaft (# 00757895), Make sure Bearing is seated down against on shaft far enough that Gear can be installed. Install Gear (#00758645 (20 tooth) 540 rpm or #00758669 (26 tooth) 1000 rpm).
Install Snap Ring (#00758660) onto Output Shaft (#00758658) this holds gear on Shaft. Insert Shaft with Gear and Bearing on into Horizontal Housing. Install Outer Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) over Output Shaft and into Housing till it seats against Outer Bearing Cup. Screw Bearing Adjusting Nut onto Output Shaft till it touches Bearing Cone. Continue to tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling torque. Tap Shaft with a Hammer and recheck Bearing Pre-Load, If it is correct Stake Adjusting Nut to Shaft by Bend top of Nut into Groove on Shaft, this will prevent Nut from turning and loosening up.
Install Seal (#00758653) into Seal Adapter (#00758652) coat OD of adapter with gasket sealer and ID of Seal with light coat of grease and install Seal Adapter into Horizontal Hub Housing.
To Install Output Shaft Housing Assemblies into Main Housing. (DO NOT USE any Gasket sealer at this time) Put Shims and Gasket on Output Housing Assembly and insert it into Main Housing, These shim are used to set Backlash on Gears. Backlash is changed by adding or removing Shims. Tighten Bolts and check Gear Backlash, It should be .017" to .019". When Gear Backlash is correct, Remove Bolts and put Gasket sealer on Gaskets, reinstall Bolts and Lockwashers and tighten down.
After both Horizontal Hub Assemblies have been installed, Install To fill Gearbox full of Oil. Fill till Oil runs out of oil level plug in side of gearbox housing. Insert Plugs, oil level plug on side and Vent plug on top. ALWAYS wait enough time for Oil to run in between Inner and Out Bearings on Out Put Shaft Assemblies before deciding Oil Level is Full. After ruining mower for 30 minutes to an hour always recheck oil level.

GEARBOX P/N 00757828
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758661).
Install Lower Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on Output Shaft (#00758687) make sure Bearing cone slides all the way down against shoulder at bottom of shaft. Slide Bearing Cup (part of #00758650) down over Bearing Cone.
Screw the 2 pieces of Bearing Spacer (#00758679 outer & #00758662 inner) together, Screw together BUT DO NOT bend to lock at this time. Slide Bearing Spacers down over Output Shaft. (this 2 piece spacer can be replaced by using Kit #00761517, which replaces Spacer & output shaft with later style).
Put Upper Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone)over Shaft and slide down till it sits against Bearing Spacer. Slide upper Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) down over Output Shaft till it is against Bearing Cup, Install retaining Rings (#00758688 & #00758660) on Shaft above Upper Bearing Cone. It may be required to shorten Bearing Spaced by screwing it together to get Snap Ring on Shaft.
Look at Drawing, If assembled correct the Upper and Lower Bearing Cups and Cone will be on Shaft Opposite each other. Screw Bearing Spacer apart till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque Pre-Load. When this is done the Bearing Spacer WILL HAVE TO BE locked, This is done by Bending Outer Bearing Spacer into Inner Bearing Spacer, You will see a groove (looks like keyway) in inner Spacer on threads, This is where you bend Outer Spacer down into this groove. Make SURE it is staked in tight.
Slip Shaft with Bearings and Spacer into the Bottom Side of Main Housing, Push into shaft till upper Bearing cup is bottomed out in Main Housing. Install Output Seal (#00758674) into Lower Output Cap (#00758663), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758676, #00758677 and #00758678) quantity may vary and DO NOT USE gasket sealer on shims at this time, Install Output Cap and tighten Bolts. Check Bearing Pre-Load, If it is not correct remove or ad Shims a needed. When Bearing Pre-Load is correct remove and coat Shims with a Gasket Sealer then re-tighten Bolts, Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Check and install Shims (#00758666, #00758667 and #00758668) on top of Output Shaft under Gear (#00758693 a 13 tooth gear), try to use same Quantity of shims as came off here. Sit Gear down over Output Shaft and slide down making sure gear is seated against Shims. Later When adjusting Gear Back Lash it may be required to add or remove some of these shims.
Install Input Shaft (PTO end), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758702).
Install Gear Spacer (#00758657) Input Shaft. Install Shim (#00758667 & #00758668) on Shaft next to Gear Spacers (the quantity will vary, try to put same as taken off), Slide Input Gear (#00758694 a 19 tooth gear) on front side of shaft or rear of Shaft depending on Left or Right Gearbox till it is against against Shims, Install Front Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) on front of Input Shaft making sure it is against Shims. Install Rear Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on rear of input Shaft making sure it is against shoulder on Shaft.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing. lower Input Shaft ( with Gears, Spacers, Shims and Bearing Cones on it) down into Main housing from front side. Install Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) into Front Input Bearing Cap (#00758664), Install Input Seal (#00758653) into Front Bearing Cap, Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758646, #00758647 & #00758648) on front cover set it down over input shaft, Tighten Front cover Bolts.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Move Shim from one side of input gear to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Tighten front cover bolts and recheck Gear and Bearing settings.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00757828B
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758661).
Install Lower Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on Output Shaft (#00760892) make sure Bearing cone slides all the way down against shoulder at bottom of shaft. Slide Bearing Cup (part of #00758650) down over Bearing Cone.
Install the 1 piece Bearing Spacer (#00760889) down over Output Shaft. Put Upper Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone)over Shaft and slide down till it sits against Bearing Spacer. Slide upper Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) down over Output Shaft till it is against Bearing Cup.
Slip Shaft with Bearings and Spacer into the Bottom Side of Main Housing, Push in shaft till upper Bearing cup is bottomed out in Main Housing.
Slide Gear Spacer (#00759977) down over Shaft and against Upper Bearing Cone, Install Shims (#00758667 and #00758668) over Shaft, Quantity of Shims will vary, try to use same amount as was taken off. install Output Gear (#00758693 a 13 tooth gear) down over output Shaft. There ARE 2 DIFFERENT types of Bearing Adjusting Nuts used, 1st, Tabbed locking washer and Nut, If this is type used there will be Hardened Flat washer that MUST be install on top of gear, Install Tabbed Locking washer next then Nut. 2 nd type is a Slotted Hex Nut with Cotter Pin, this type WILL NOT use Hardened Flat Washer Nut will go against gear.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut, either with Bendup Tabs or Cotter Pin depending which type you have.
Install Output Seal (#00758674) into Lower Output Cap (#00758663), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758676, #00758677 and #00758678) quantity may vary according to how large space is between Cap and Main Housing. DO USE gasket sealer on shims at this time, Install Output Cap and tighten Bolts. Check Bearing Pre-Load, If correct amount of Shims used it should not have changed. Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft (PTO end), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758702).
Install Gear Spacer (#00758657) Input Shaft. Install Shim (#00758667 & #00758668) on Shaft next to Gear Spacers (the quantity will vary, try to put same as taken off), Slide Input Gear (#00758694 a 19 tooth gear) on till it is against against Shims, Install Front Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) on front of Input Shaft making sure it is against Shims. Install Rear Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on rear of input Shaft making sure it is against shoulder on Shaft.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing. lower Input Shaft ( with Gears, Spacers, Shims and Bearing Cones on it) down into Main housing from front side. Install Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) into Front Input Bearing Cap (#00758664), Install Input Seal (#00758653) into Front Bearing Cap, Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758646, #00758647 & #00758648) on front cover set it down over input shaft, Tighten Front cover Bolts.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Move Shim from one side of input gear to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Tighten front cover bolts and recheck Gear and Bearing settings.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00757918
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Shaft, Bearings & Gear in Lower Extension Housing (item 18).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (item 23 Cup & Cone) into Lower Housing (item 18) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (item 22) into Lower Housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (item 22 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Lower Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (item 23 Cup & Cone) over Output Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (item 14) down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (item 25) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 26) onto top of Out put Shaft. Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then secure Bearing Adjusting Nut with Cotter Pin.
Install Output Seal (item 21) coating ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Install Seal Protector (item 20) now, Seal Protector (item 20), This Seal Protector Should always be replaced with new one after being removed. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Output Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a Rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft (PTO end), Shaft, Bearings & Gear into Top Housing (item 6).
Install Inner Bearing Cup (item 22 Cup & Cone) in Upper Housing, This will install from inside housing. Install Outer Bearing Cup (item 22 Cup & Cone) from the outside of Housing. Slide Outer Bearing Cone (item 22 Cup & Cone) onto Input Shaft (item 9) from Gear end, Slide Input Shaft with Outer Bearing Cone on it into Housing from the outside. Slide Inner Bearing Cone (item 22 Cup & Cone) onto input shaft from Gear end till it is seated into Bearing Cup.
Install Gear Shims (item 15 a/r) onto input shaft from Gear end. Install Gear Spacer (item 16) onto input shaft, Slide Input Gear (item 17) onto input Shaft. Put Spring Washer (item 27) on input shaft. Screw Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 28) onto input Shaft. Tighten Adjusting Nut (item 28) till you achieve a Bearing Pre-Load of 14" to 16" lbs of rolling torque. Install Input Seal (item 21) coating ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Input Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a Rolling Torque.
Install Output Shaft (Cross Shaft), Shaft, Bearings & Gear into Top Housing (item 6), To do this turn Top Housing upside down on Work Bench.
With Input Shaft pointing toward you install R.

GEARBOX P/N 00758217B
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758661).
Install Lower Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on Output Shaft (#00760892) make sure Bearing cone slides all the way down against shoulder at bottom of shaft. Slide Bearing Cup (part of #00758650) down over Bearing Cone.
Install the 1 piece Bearing Spacer (#00760889) down over Output Shaft. Put Upper Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone)over Shaft and slide down till it sits against Bearing Spacer. Slide upper Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) down over Output Shaft till it is against Bearing Cup.
Slip Shaft with Bearings and Spacer into the Bottom Side of Main Housing, Push in shaft till upper Bearing cup is bottomed out in Main Housing.
Slide Gear Spacer (#00759977) down over Shaft and against Upper Bearing Cone, Install Shims (#00758667 and #00758668) over Shaft, Quantity of Shims will vary, try to use same amount as was taken off. install Output Gear (540 or 1000 rpm is different Gear see drawing) down over output Shaft. There ARE 2 DIFFERENT types of Bearing Adjusting Nuts used, 1st, Tabbed locking washer and Nut, If this is type used there will be Hardened Flat washer that MUST be install on top of gear, Install Tabbed Locking washer next then Nut. 2 nd type is a Slotted Hex Nut with Cotter Pin, this type WILL NOT use Hardened Flat Washer Nut will go against gear.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut, either with Bendup Tabs or Cotter Pin depending which type you have.
Install Output Seal (#00758674) into Lower Output Cap (#00758663), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758676, #00758677 and #00758678) quantity may vary according to how large space is between Cap and Main Housing. DO USE gasket sealer on shims at this time, Install Output Cap and tighten Bolts. Check Bearing Pre-Load, If correct amount of Shims used it should not have changed. Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft (PTO end), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758702).
Install Gear Spacer (#00758657) Input Shaft. Install Shim (#00758667 & #00758668) on Shaft next to Gear Spacers (the quantity will vary, try to put same as taken off), Slide Input Gear (540 RPM & 1000 RPM Gear Different see drawing), till it is against against Shims, Install Front Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) on front of Input Shaft making sure it is against Shims. Install Rear Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on rear of input Shaft making sure it is against shoulder on Shaft.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing. lower Input Shaft ( with Gears, Spacers, Shims and Bearing Cones on it) down into Main housing from front side. Install Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) into Front Input Bearing Cap (#00758664), Install Input Seal (#00758653) into Front Bearing Cap, Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758646, #00758647 & #00758648) on front cover set it down over input shaft, Tighten Front cover Bolts.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Move Shim from one side of input gear to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Tighten front cover bolts and recheck Gear and Bearing settings.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00758959
Install Output Shaft/Pinion Gear (item 12) into Main Housing (item 8) install Output Shaft before installing Input Shaft.
Install Pinion Shim (item 26,27,28) onto Output shaft from Bottom. Drop upper Output Shaft Bearing Cup (item 13) onto output Shaft (item 12), Drop Bearing Cone (item 13) onto Output Shaft, Slide Shims (item 26.27,28) onto Shaft (when installing Shims try Qty that was removed) Install Retaining Snap Ring (item 14) on output Shaft just below upper Bearing and shims, You should have enough Shims (item 26,27,28) that Snap Ring (item 14) holds Bearing, Spacer and Shims snug on Shaft.
Install Lower Bearing Space (item 15) on Output Shaft, Note that Bearing Spacer is installed in the correct direction, There is a groove machined in the upper ID to slide over Snap Ring (item 14) if it is not installed this way it will not work.
Drop Lower Bearing Cone (item 13) down over Output Shaft, Slide Lower Bearing Cup (item 13) down over Bearing Cone. Slide this completed Output Shaft with components in to the Main Housing (item 8). Make sure that all components are slid in as far as they will go. Using Lower Bearing Cap Shim Gaskets (item 23,24,25) DO NOT put Gasket Sealer on Gaskets yet & DO NOT install lower Seal. Fit Bearing cap with Gasket Shims (item 23,24,25) down over Output Shaft. Add or remove Gasket Shims to Set Bearing Pre-Load in Output Shaft Bearings, Set Bearing Pre-Load from 14 to 16 inch lbs of rolling torque.
When Finished with Step 4 go on to installing Input Shaft or if only replacing Out put shaft go on to set Gear Back-Lash Step 9.
Install Input Shaft & Gear. Install Inner Input Shaft Bearing (item 9) into back of Main Housing (item 6), make sure bearing is seated completely into Housing.
Install Retaining Ring (item 7) onto input Shaft (item 1), this is the one nearest the middle of the Shaft (Note there are three grooves here make sure to install it in correct one). Slide Input Gear (item 6) down onto input Shaft ( item 1) till it is seated against Retaining Ring (item 7). Slide Outer Input Bearing (item 3) down over Shaft till it seats against Input Gear.
Slide shaft w/ components into Gearbox Main Housing. Using Gasket/ Shims (item 5 Don't use gasket sealer or Install Input seal at this time) slide Input Bearing Cap (item 4) on over Input Shaft, Tighten till end Play is removed from Input Shaft by adding or removing gaskets.
Gear Back-Lash is set by moving Shims at upper Output Shaft Brg from below Brg to above or Vice Versa. Also it can be changed by removing or adding Shims (item 7) on Input Shaft. Gear Back-Lash should be from .016" to .019".
If Brg Back lash is OK remove Bearing Caps (item 16 & 4), Check Seal areas and install Seal. Use Gasket sealer now if wanted & re-install Brg caps. Re-check Bearing Back Lash & Lower Bearing Pre-Load.
Fill Gearbox with oil. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. Wait a while let Gearbox sit and have time for Oil to run down into lower Bearings and recheck Oil Level. ALWAYS recheck Oil Level after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour. Inspect Seals for leaking after filling with Oil and after running 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00768996
Install Cross Shaft (Side Drive Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00762519).
Inspect the Hole in Bearing Caps for the Seal in All the openings, remove any sharp edges or burrs before installing Seal, Inspect old Seal to make sure there are no lines cut across the outer dia. of it. If there are this is good sign that burrs exist around hole. Install Bearing Cup ( # 00755628 Cup & Cone) and Seal (# 00758653) into both of the 2 Side Bearing Caps (# 00762516), Coat ID of Seals with light coat of Grease.
Using Shims from Shim Kit (# 00748531) DO NOT put gasket Sealer on Shims at this time, Install Side Bearing Cap (# 00762516) to the Right Side of Main Housing (# 00752519). Tighten Bolts snug.
Install Bearing Cone (# 00755628 Cup & Cone) onto Right Side of Cross Shaft (# 00762518) Slide Gear Spacer (# 00755657 ) on to Left Side of Shaft till it rest against the Shoulder of Shaft.
Slide the Output Gear (# 00759488) on to Cross Shaft from Left Side till it is against the Gear Spacer. Slide the other Bearing Cone (# 00755628 Cup & Cone) on against Gear. Coat the Cross Shaft with light coat of Grease at the Seal wear area then Slide Cross Shaft with Bearings, Spacer and Gear into Main housing from the Left Side and into the Bearing Cap bolted on the right side.
Using Shims from Shim Kit (# 00748531) DO NOT put gasket Sealer on Shims at this time, Install Side Bearing Cap (# 00762516) to the Left Side of Main Housing (# 00752519). Tighten Bolts snug.
Check Bearing Pre-Load it should be 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque, If it is not correct remove or add Shims till it is correct. and re snug Bearing Cap Bolts. DO NOT Use Gasket Sealer on Shims / Gaskets at this time.
Install Input Shaft (PTO Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Input Hub Housing (#00762520).
Inspect the Hole in Bearing Caps for the Seal in All the openings, remove any sharp edges or burrs before installing Seal, Inspect old Seal to make sure there are no lines cut across the outer dia. of it. If there are this is good sign that burrs exist around hole. Install Bearing Cup ( # 00755628 Cup & Cone) into both ends of the Input Hub Housing, Be sure to install them as shown in drawing so the bearing cones can be installed from the outside. The Input Seal (# 00762521)can be installed now into Input Housing (# 00762520).
Slide Bearing Cone (# 00755628 Cup & Cone) onto input shaft from the Gear end, Make sure that Bearing is down against shoulder on Shaft. Put light coat of grease on Shaft at Seal wear area and around the ID of Seal then slide Input Shaft (#00762522) into Input Hub Housing.
Slide Bearing Cone (# 00755628 Cup & Cone) onto input Shaft till it is seated in the Bearing Cup. Slide Input Gear (# 00759487) onto Input Shaft till it bottoms out against Bearing Cone.
Screw Bearing Adjust Nut (# 00762121) onto Input Shaft, Tighten Nut till Bearings have a Pre- Load of 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque, Tap end of Shaft lightly with a Hammer to make sure Bearing Cones are seated in Cups and Bearing Cones are seated against Shoulder on Shaft. Recheck Bearing Pre-Load, If it is correct install Cotter Pin (# 00026200).
Using Shims from Shim Kit (# 00748531) DO NOT put gasket Sealer on Shims at this time, Install Input Hub Housing (# 00762520) in to the front of Main Housing (# 00752519). Tighten Bolts snug.
Check Gear Back-Lash, it should be from .017" to .019", To Set Back-Lash the Shims for the Input Hub Housing will need to be removed or more added as needed. Also the wear pattern of the Gears should be checked, This can be changed by moving Shims on the two Cross Shaft Bearing Caps from one side or the other. DO NOT remove them completely, if you remove one from one side it must be moved to the other side, this will move the cross shaft gear closer or further away from input gear and keep the correct Bearing Pre-Load.
When all Setting are correct remove housings and caps, use sealer on shims if desired and Re- Check all the Bolts to make sure they are tight. recheck all Settings one more time.
Fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Shafts and Bearing, Then refill with Oil, Install all Oil Fill & Vent Plugs, Check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00759205B & 00759206B
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758661).
Install Lower Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on Output Shaft (#00760892) make sure Bearing cone slides all the way down against shoulder at bottom of shaft. Slide Bearing Cup (part of #00758650) down over Bearing Cone.
Install the 1 piece Bearing Spacer (#00760889) down over Output Shaft. Put Upper Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone)over Shaft and slide down till it sits against Bearing Spacer. Slide upper Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) down over Output Shaft till it is against Bearing Cup.
Slip Shaft with Bearings and Spacer into the Bottom Side of Main Housing, Push in shaft till upper Bearing cup is bottomed out in Main Housing.
Slide Gear Spacer (#00759977) down over Shaft and against Upper Bearing Cone, Install Shims (#00758667 and #00758668) over Shaft, Quantity of Shims will vary, try to use same amount as was taken off. install Output Gear (540 or 1000 rpm is different Gear see drawing) down over output Shaft. There ARE 2 DIFFERENT types of Bearing Adjusting Nuts used, 1st, Tabbed locking washer and Nut, If this is type used there will be Hardened Flat washer that MUST be install on top of gear, Install Tabbed Locking washer next then Nut. 2 nd type is a Slotted Hex Nut with Cotter Pin, this type WILL NOT use Hardened Flat Washer Nut will go against gear.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut, either with Bendup Tabs or Cotter Pin depending which type you have.
Install Output Seal (#00758674) into Lower Output Cap (#00758663), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758676, #00758677 and #00758678) quantity may vary according to how large space is between Cap and Main Housing. DO USE gasket sealer on shims at this time, Install Output Cap and tighten Bolts. Check Bearing Pre-Load, If correct amount of Shims used it should not have changed. Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft (PTO end), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758702).
Install Gear Spacer (#00758657) Input Shaft. Install Shim (#00758667 & #00758668) on Shaft next to Gear Spacers (the quantity will vary, try to put same as taken off), Slide Input Gear (540 RPM & 1000 RPM Gear Different see drawing), till it is against against Shims, Install Front Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) on front of Input Shaft making sure it is against Shims. Install Rear Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on rear of input Shaft making sure it is against shoulder on Shaft.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing. lower Input Shaft ( with Gears, Spacers, Shims and Bearing Cones on it) down into Main housing from front side. Install Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) into Front Input Bearing Cap (#00758664), Install Input Seal (#00758653) into Front Bearing Cap, Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758646, #00758647 & #00758648) on front cover set it down over input shaft, Tighten Front cover Bolts.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Move Shim from one side of input gear to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Tighten front cover bolts and recheck Gear and Bearing settings.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00760403B, 00750506B & 00750507B
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758661).
Install Lower Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on Output Shaft (#00760892) make sure Bearing cone slides all the way down against shoulder at bottom of shaft. Slide Bearing Cup (part of #00758650) down over Bearing Cone.
Install the 1 piece Bearing Spacer (#00760889) down over Output Shaft. Put Upper Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone)over Shaft and slide down till it sits against Bearing Spacer. Slide upper Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) down over Output Shaft till it is against Bearing Cup.
Slip Shaft with Bearings and Spacer into the Bottom Side of Main Housing, Push in shaft till upper Bearing cup is bottomed out in Main Housing.
Slide Gear Spacer (#00759977) down over Shaft and against Upper Bearing Cone, Install Shims (#00758667 and #00758668) over Shaft, Quantity of Shims will vary, try to use same amount as was taken off. install Output Gear (540 or 1000 rpm is different Gear see drawing) down over output Shaft. There ARE 2 DIFFERENT types of Bearing Adjusting Nuts used, 1st, Tabbed locking washer and Nut, If this is type used there will be Hardened Flat washer that MUST be install on top of gear, Install Tabbed Locking washer next then Nut. 2 nd type is a Slotted Hex Nut with Cotter Pin, this type WILL NOT use Hardened Flat Washer Nut will go against gear.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut, either with Bendup Tabs or Cotter Pin depending which type you have.
Install Output Seal (#00758674) into Lower Output Cap (#00758663), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758676, #00758677 and #00758678) quantity may vary according to how large space is between Cap and Main Housing. DO USE gasket sealer on shims at this time, Install Output Cap and tighten Bolts. Check Bearing Pre-Load, If correct amount of Shims used it should not have changed. Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft (PTO end), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758702).
Install Gear Spacer (#00758657) Input Shaft. Install Shim (#00758667 & #00758668) on Shaft next to Gear Spacers (the quantity will vary, try to put same as taken off), Slide Input Gear (540 RPM & 1000 RPM Gear Different see drawing), till it is against against Shims, Install Front Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) on front of Input Shaft making sure it is against Shims. Install Rear Input Shaft Bearing Cone (#00758650 Cup & Cone) on rear of input Shaft making sure it is against shoulder on Shaft.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cup (#00758650 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing. lower Input Shaft ( with Gears, Spacers, Shims and Bearing Cones on it) down into Main housing from front side. Install Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) into Front Input Bearing Cap (#00758664), Install Input Seal (#00758653) into Front Bearing Cap, Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Using Shims (#00758646, #00758647 & #00758648) on front cover set it down over input shaft, Tighten Front cover Bolts.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Move Shim from one side of input gear to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Tighten front cover bolts and recheck Gear and Bearing settings.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00760880
Install Cross Shaft (Side Drive Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00762519).
Inspect the Hole in Bearing Caps for the Seal in All the openings, remove any sharp edges or burrs before installing Seal, Inspect old Seal to make sure there are no lines cut across the outer dia. of it. If there are this is good sign that burrs exist around hole. Install Bearing Cup ( # 00755628 Cup & Cone) and Seal (# 00758653) into both of the 2 Side Bearing Caps (# 00762516), Coat ID of Seals with light coat of Grease.
Using Shims from Shim Kit (# 00748531) DO NOT put gasket Sealer on Shims at this time, Install Side Bearing Cap (# 00762516) to the Right Side of Main Housing (# 00752519). Tighten Bolts snug.
Install Bearing Cone (# 00755628 Cup & Cone) onto Right Side of Cross Shaft (# 00762518) Slide Gear Spacer (# 00755657 ) on to Left Side of Shaft till it rest against the Shoulder of Shaft.
Slide the Output Gear (# 00758694) on to Cross Shaft from Left Side till it is against the Gear Spacer. Slide the other Bearing Cone (# 00755628 Cup & Cone) on against Gear. Coat the Cross Shaft with light coat of Grease at the Seal wear area then Slide Cross Shaft with Bearings, Spacer and Gear into Main housing from the Left Side and into the Bearing Cap bolted on the right side.
Using Shims from Shim Kit (# 00748531) DO NOT put gasket Sealer on Shims at this time, Install Side Bearing Cap (# 00762516) to the Left Side of Main Housing (# 00752519). Tighten Bolts snug.
Check Bearing Pre-Load it should be 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque, If it is not correct remove or add Shims till it is correct. and re snug Bearing Cap Bolts. DO NOT Use Gasket Sealer on Shims / Gaskets at this time.
Install Input Shaft (PTO Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Input Hub Housing (#00762520).
Inspect the Hole in Bearing Caps for the Seal in All the openings, remove any sharp edges or burrs before installing Seal, Inspect old Seal to make sure there are no lines cut across the outer dia. of it. If there are this is good sign that burrs exist around hole. Install Bearing Cup ( # 00755628 Cup & Cone) into both ends of the Input Hub Housing, Be sure to install them as shown in drawing so the bearing cones can be installed from the outside. The Input Seal (# 00762521)can be installed now into Input Housing (# 00762520).
Slide Bearing Cone (# 00755628 Cup & Cone) onto input shaft from the Gear end, Make sure that Bearing is down against shoulder on Shaft. Put light coat of grease on Shaft at Seal wear area and around the ID of Seal then slide Input Shaft (#00762522) into Input Hub Housing.
Slide Bearing Cone (# 00755628 Cup & Cone) onto input Shaft till it is seated in the Bearing Cup. Slide Input Gear (# 00758693) onto Input Shaft till it bottoms out against Bearing Cone.
Screw Bearing Adjust Nut (# 00762121) onto Input Shaft, Tighten Nut till Bearings have a Pre- Load of 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque, Tap end of Shaft lightly with a Hammer to make sure Bearing Cones are seated in Cups and Bearing Cones are seated against Shoulder on Shaft. Recheck Bearing Pre-Load, If it is correct install Cotter Pin (# 00026200).
Using Shims from Shim Kit (# 00748531) DO NOT put gasket Sealer on Shims at this time, Install Input Hub Housing (# 00762520) in to the front of Main Housing (# 00752519). Tighten Bolts snug.
Check Gear Back-Lash, it should be from .017" to .019", To Set Back-Lash the Shims for the Input Hub Housing will need to be removed or more added as needed. Also the wear pattern of the Gears should be checked, This can be changed by moving Shims on the two Cross Shaft Bearing Caps from one side or the other. DO NOT remove them completely, if you remove one from one side it must be moved to the other side, this will move the cross shaft gear closer or further away from input gear and keep the correct Bearing Pre-Load.
When all Setting are correct remove housings and caps, use sealer on shims if desired and Re- Check all the Bolts to make sure they are tight. recheck all Settings one more time.
Fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Shafts and Bearing, Then refill with Oil, Install all Oil Fill & Vent Plugs, Check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00763623
Install Output Shaft/Pinion Gear (item 19) into Main Housing (item 1) install Output Shaft before installing Input Shaft.
Drop upper Output Shaft Bearing (item 3) onto output Shaft (item 19), install Retaining Snap Ring (item 6) on output Shaft just below upper Bearing.
Wing Main Housing (item 1) upside down drop Output Shaft with upper Bearing on it into Housing. Slide Lower Bearing Spacer (item 18) in Housing till it seats against upper Bearing. Slide lower Output Bearing (item 3) onto Output Shaft.
Before installing lower Seal Check seal area for scratches or burrs that will cause seal to leak. Install Lower seal (item 16) into Output Bearing Cap (item 17), Install Bearing cap using Gaskets (item 10 & 11) as required, Do Not use gasket sealer at this time on these gaskets. Use enough gasket/Gaskets to remove end play from shaft, These are Ball Bearing so there is no Bearing Pre-Load. After End Play in shaft is correct add Sealer to Gaskets.
Install Input Shaft & Gear. Install Inner Input Shaft Bearing (item 20) into back of Main Housing (item 1), make sure bearing is seated completely into Housing.
Install Retaining Ring (item 6) onto input Shaft (item 5), this is the one nearest the middle of the Shaft (Note there are two grooves here make sure to install it in correct one). Slide Input Gear (item 7) down onto input Shaft ( item 5) till it is seated against Retaining Ring (item 6). Slide Outer Input Bearing (item 3) down over Shaft till it seat against Input gear. Install Retaining Ring (item 6) onto input shaft to hold Bearing.
Check Input Bearing Cap (item 2) at seal area for Scratches or Burrs that could cause Seal to Leak. Install Input Seal (item 4) into Bearing Cap (item 2), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of Grease. Using Gasket/Gaskets (Item 8) Do Not use Gasket Sealer at this time. install Bearing Cap down over input shaft and tighten Bolts (item 13) Check Shaft end Play and Gear Back-Lash (.016" to .019"), if it is Correct remove Bearing Cap and install gasket Sealer if desired and reinstall checking setting again.
Fill Gearbox with oil. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. Wait a while let Gearbox sit and have time for Oil to run down into lower Bearings and recheck Oil Level. ALWAYS recheck Oil Level after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour. Inspect Seals for leaking after filling with Oil and after running 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00763623B
Install Output Shaft/Pinion Gear (item 19) into Main Housing (item 1) install Output Shaft before installing Input Shaft.
Drop upper Output Shaft Bearing (item 24) & Shims (item 9) onto output Shaft (item 19), install Retaining Snap Ring (item 6) on output Shaft just below upper Bearing.
Wing Main Housing (item 1) upside down drop Output Shaft with upper Bearing on it into Housing. Slide Lower Bearing Spacer (item 18) in Housing till it seats against upper Bearing. Slide lower Output Bearing (item 24) onto Output Shaft.
Before installing lower Seal Check seal area for scratches or burrs that will cause seal to leak. Install Lower seal (item 16) into Output Bearing Cap (item 17), Install Bearing cap using Gaskets (item 10 & 11) as required, Do Not use gasket sealer at this time on these gaskets. Use enough gasket/Gaskets to remove end play from shaft, These are Ball Bearing so there is no Bearing Pre-Load. After End Play in shaft is correct add Sealer to Gaskets.
Install Input Shaft & Gear. Install Inner Input Shaft Bearing (item 20) into back of Main Housing (item 1), make sure bearing is seated completely into Housing.
Install Retaining Ring (item 6) onto input Shaft (item 5), this is the one nearest the middle of the Shaft (Note there are two grooves here make sure to install it in correct one). Slide Input Gear (item 7) down onto input Shaft ( item 5) till it is seated against Retaining Ring (item 6). Slide Outer Input Bearing (item 3) down over Shaft till it seat against Input gear. Install Retaining Ring (item 6) onto input shaft to hold Bearing.
Check Input Bearing Cap (item 2) at seal area for Scratches or Burrs that could cause Seal to Leak. Install Input Seal (item 4) into Bearing Cap (item 2), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of Grease. Using Gasket/Gaskets (Item 8) Do Not use Gasket Sealer at this time. install Bearing Cap down over input shaft and tighten Bolts (item 13) Check Shaft end Play and Gear Back-Lash (.016" to .019"), if it is Correct remove Bearing Cap and install gasket Sealer if desired and reinstall checking setting again.
Fill Gearbox with oil. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Oil Level Plug. Wait a while let Gearbox sit and have time for Oil to run down into lower Bearings and recheck Oil Level. ALWAYS recheck Oil Level after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour. Inspect Seals for leaking after filling with Oil and after running 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00763666
Inspect all Components First, Check Seal Seats, Inner & Outer Bearing Cup Seats. Inspect Housing Halfs for mating surface condition, Check Threads in Housing half that is threaded.
Prepare Housing Position for Assembly. Lay the Bottom Housing Half (item 7 the Half w/o threaded holes) on Bench in front of you, note: Look at drawing, The widest part of housing is from left to right.
Assemble Input Shaft / Cross Shaft (item 2) into Main Housing (item 1) install Input Shaft before installing 2 Output Shafts. Notice Input shaft has 2 Retaining Snap Ring (item 10) grooves on it, Install the Snap Rings on Input Shaft now.
On end of Input Shaft where Gear (item 6) goes there is a Keyway, Install Key (item 9) and slide Gear (item 6) down on to Input Shaft till it goes over Key and seats against Snap Ring.
Slide Bearing Cone (item 4) down over Input Shaft till it seats against Gear, Slide Bearing Cone (item 4) down over Input Shaft on the other end till it is seated against Snap Ring. Slide a Bearing Cup (item 5) on Shaft till it is over Bearing Cones.
Coat ID of Seals (use 2 of item 3) with a light coat of grease and slide them over ends of Cross Shaft (item 2).
With Cross Shaft and all the Components lifted above install sit it into the Housing Half (item 7) as shown in drawing.
Assemble Side Drive Shafts LH & RH, Install Outer retaining Snap Ring (item 10) onto Side Driver Shaft (item 1). Slide Bearing Cone (item 4) onto Shaft from gear Side of Shaft till it seats against Outer Retaining Ring (item 10). Slide Bearing Cup (item 5) onto Shaft from same end.
Slide Inner bearing Cup (item 5) onto Shaft from Gear end, Install Key (item 9) into Keyway of Shaft and install Gear (item 6) over Key, Install Snap Ring (item 10) on shaft to retain Gear. Coat ID of Seal (item 3) with light coat of grease and slide it onto Shaft from outer end.
Sit Side Drive Shaft (item 1) with Bearings, Gear, Snap Rings and Seal installed into Housing as shown in drawing. Do this for LH & RH Shaft. Make sure that these assemblies are seated down into the Bearing Cup and Seal areas completely.
Housing Halves Assemble. Using a good Gasket Forming Material install Top Half of Housing (item 8) down onto Lower Half (item 7), Make sure that Housing goes down with out being forced. DO NOT FORCE Housing half together, If they will not slide together check the alignment of components.
With Halves together install the Bolts (item 12 Not Shown in Drawing) into Housing, Tighten these in a Alternating circular Pattern and in increments that will tighten the two halved together slowly and evenly Continue this till the two halves are bolted together, Inspect them to be sure.
Install Bottom Plug (item 11 into Bottom Housing.
Check Shafts for end play and Gear Back-Lash, There is NO Adjustments on this Gearbox for Shaft End PLay or Gear Back Lash, The Housings have been Machined to allow the proper tolerances. If Setting are not in Tolerance Assembly needs to recheck and Also Housing condition needs to be reinspected.
Fill Gearbox with Oil, If every thing is correct Fill Gearbox with oil. DO NOT Fill with Oil above Suggested Oil Level . Wait awhile and let Gearbox sit to have time for Oil to run through and intoOuter Bearings, Then recheck Oil Level. There is NO Oil Level Plug on this Gearbox. The Best way to check OIl level is with a screw Driver, Through opening for top Plug insert screw driver and use it like a Dip Stick. The Oil Level for this Gearbox is 1/2 the Height of the Gearbox Housing from Bottom to Top. ALWAYS recheck Oil Level after running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour. Inspect Seals for leaking after filling with Oil and after running 1/2 to 1 hour.

GEARBOX P/N 00764053
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00755613).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (#00755613) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (#00755628) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (#00755622) down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (#00758506) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Insert Shim (#00755638 washer) down against gear, Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00756943) onto top of Out put Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then secure Bearing Adjusting Nut with Cotter Pin.
DO NOT Install Output Seal (#00755627) now, wait till Input Shaft has been installed, When you do install Seal Coat ID with light coat of grease. Install Seal Protector (#00755626), this drives into lower Main Housing, This Seal Protector Should always be replaced with new one after being removed. Re-Check Bearing Pre-Load. Output Shaft Should have NO end play and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque. (See 5.).
Install Input Shaft, Bearings and Gear into Main Housing (#00755613).
Install External Clip (#00755620) on Input Shaft (#00755617) next to where Gear goes. Install External Clip (#00755632) on Input Shaft next to rear Bearing area. Drop Input Gear (#00758506) into Gearbox Main Housing from the top. Holding Gear in-place insert Input Shaft into Main Housing from the rear through rear Bearing opening on center and left wing Gearbox, from the front on Right wing Gearbox. Slide shaft guiding it through input Gear. slide Shaft in till External Clip is against Gear.
Install Rear Input Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into Rear of Main Housing till it is against External Clip on Shaft. Install Bearing Cup (#00755615 Cup & Cone) into rear of main housing, Install Shims (#00755619) in against Bearing Cup try to use the same amount of shims as were removed. Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time. Install Front Bearing Cone (#00755615 Cup & Cone) onto Input Shaft from the front till they are against Input Gear. Install Shims against Bearing Cup, Install Internal Clip (#00755618) into front of Main Housing against Shims. DO NOT install any Seals at this time.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque) and Gear Back Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash) If it is not correct, Add or remove shims from Input Shaft Bearings will change Bearing Pre-Load, Move Shim from one side of input Bearing to other to Get Correct Back Lash, It may be required to add or remove shims from Blade Shaft output Gear to raise or lower it to get correct Back lash. Once all is correct Install Input Seal (#00755616) and Rear Seal Cap (#00755634) then recheck Gear and Bearing settings. Now is the time to install Output seal and lower seal protector, (see step 6).
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket), Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00769115
Install Input Shaft (Center Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758644) install Input shaft before Output Shafts to Wings.
Install Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) in Main Housing and Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) in front Bearing Carrier Cap (#00758664), Drive Cups in till they bottom out, Check this before continuing. Then Lay Bearing Carrier Cap aside for now.
Install Gear Spacer (#00758657) onto Input Shaft, Slide Gear (#00758656 (23 tooth) 540 rpm or #00758670 (20 tooth) 1000 rpm)) onto Input Shaft making sure gear is against Gear Spacer, If Gear is put on backward the assemblies for Wing Output won't fit. Next install Inner Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) and outer Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) on to Shaft making sure inner bearing is bottomed out against gear and outer Bearing Cone is against shoulder on Input Shaft.
Install Seal (#00758653) into Bearing Carrier Cap and Seal (#00758653) into rear of Main Housing. Coat ID of Seals with light coat of Grease, using Shims (DO NOT put Gasket Sealer on Shims at this time) Tighten down Bearing Carrier Cap and check Bearing Pre-Load, It should be 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque, Shaft should not have any end play in or out. If less Pre-Load is needed remove Shims if more is needed add shims. If Bearing Pre-Load is right, remove Bearing Carrier Cap and coat shims with Sealer and reinstall, Tighten Bolts and Recheck Bearing Pre-Load.
Install Output Shaft Asy, Bearings, Gear (Output) in Horizontal Hub Housing (#00762520) Always install Center Input Shaft in Main Housing first, see step 1.
Install Outer Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) and Inner Bearing Cup (#00755828 Cup & Cone) into Horizontal Hub Housing (#00762520), (inner cup near gear and one outer cup near seal), They are the same and can be installed inner or outer Cup, Install cups in Housing till they bottom out against shoulders in Housing.
Install Outer Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) onto Output Shaft (# 00762522), Make sure Bearing is seated down against Shoulder on shaft. Slide Shaft with Bearing into Housing from Outside. Install Inner Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Shaft from Gear Side, Make sure Bearing Cone is seated into Cup. Install Gear (#00769160 (20 tooth) 540 rpm or #00769159 (26 tooth) 1000 rpm.
Install Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00762121) onto Output Shaft (#00762522) this holds gear on Shaft and adjust Bearing Pre-Load. Screw Nut onto Output Shaft till it touches Gear. Continue to tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling torque. Tap Shaft with a Hammer and recheck Bearing Pre-Load, If it is correct insert Cotter Pin (#00026200) through Adjusting Nut and Shaft, Bend bend Cotter Pin over so it can not come out, this will prevent Nut from turning and loosening up.
Install Seal (#00762521) into Horizontal Housing (#00758652), coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease and Seal into Horizontal Hub Housing.
To Install Output Shaft Housing Assemblies into Main Housing. (DO NOT USE any Gasket sealer at this time) Put Shims and Gasket on Output Housing Assembly and insert it into Main Housing, These shim are used to set Backlash on Gears. Backlash is changed by adding or removing Shims. Tighten Bolts and check Gear Backlash, It should be .017" to .019". When Gear Backlash is correct, Remove Bolts and put Gasket sealer on Gaskets, reinstall Bolts and Lockwashers and tighten down. Recheck Gear Back Lash.
After both Horizontal Hub assemblies have been installed, Install To fill Gearbox full of Oil. Fill till Oil runs out of oil level plug in side of gearbox housing. Insert Plugs, oil level plug on side and Vent plug on top. ALWAYS wait enough time for Oil to run in between Inner and Out Bearings on Out Put Shaft Assemblies before deciding Oil Level is Full. After running mower for 30 minutes to an hour always recheck oil level.

GEARBOX P/N 00769116
Install Input Shaft (Center Shaft), Bearings, Gear in Main Housing (#00758644) install Input shaft before Output Shafts to Wings.
Install Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) in Main Housing and Bearing Cup (#00758655 Cup & Cone) in front Bearing Carrier Cap (#00758664), Drive Cups in till they bottom out, Check this before continuing. Then Lay Bearing Carrier Cap aside for now.
Install Gear Spacer (#00758657) onto Input Shaft, Slide Gear (#00758656 (23 tooth) 540 rpm or #00758670 (20 tooth) 1000 rpm) onto Input Shaft making sure gear is against Gear Spacer, If Gear is put on backward the assemblies for Wing Output won't fit. Next install Inner Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) and outer Bearing Cone (#00758655 Cup & Cone) on to Shaft making sure inner bearing is bottomed out against gear and outer Bearing Cone is against shoulder on Input Shaft.
Install Seal (#00758653) into Bearing Carrier Cap and Seal (#00758653) into rear of Main Housing. Coat ID of Seals with light coat of Grease, using Shims (DO NOT put Gasket Sealer on Shims at this time) Tighten down Bearing Carrier Cap and check Bearing Pre-Load, It should be 14 to 16 inch pounds of rolling torque, Shaft should not have any end play in or out. If less Pre-Load is needed remove Shims if more is needed add shims. If Bearing Pre-Load is right, remove Bearing Carrier Cap and coat shims with Sealer and reinstall, Tighten Bolts and Recheck Bearing Pre-Load.
Install Output Shaft Asy, Bearings, Output Gear (00769159) in Horizontal Hub Housing (#00762520) Always install Center Input Shaft in Main Housing first, see step 1.
Install Outer Bearing Cup (#00755628 Cup & Cone) and Inner Bearing Cup (#00755828 Cup & Cone) into Horizontal Hub Housing (#00762520), (inner cup near gear and one outer cup near seal), They are the same and can be installed inner or outer Cup, Install cups in Housing till they bottom out against shoulders in Housing.
Install Outer Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) onto Output Shaft (# 00762522), Make sure Bearing is seated down against Shoulder on shaft. Slide Shaft with Bearing into Housing from Outside. Install Inner Bearing Cone (#00755628 Cup & Cone) over Shaft from Gear Side, Make sure Bearing Cone is seated into Cup. Install Gear (#00769160 (20 tooth) 540 rpm or #00769159 (26 tooth) 1000 rpm.
Install Bearing Adjusting Nut (#00762121) onto Output Shaft (#00762522) this holds gear on Shaft and adjust Bearing Pre-Load. Screw Nut onto Output Shaft till it touches Gear. Continue to tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling torque. Tap Shaft with a Hammer and recheck Bearing Pre-Load, If it is correct insert Cotter Pin (#00026200) through Adjusting Nut and Shaft, Bend bend Cotter Pin over so it can not come out, this will prevent Nut from turning and loosening up.
Install Seal (#00762521) into Horizontal Housing (#00758652), coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease and Seal into Horizontal Hub Housing.
To Install Output Shaft Housing Assemblies into Main Housing. (DO NOT USE any Gasket sealer at this time) Put Shims and Gasket on Output Housing Assembly and insert it into Main Housing, These shim are used to set Backlash on Gears. Backlash is changed by adding or removing Shims. Tighten Bolts and check Gear Backlash, It should be .017" to .019". When Gear Backlash is correct, Remove Bolts and put Gasket sealer on Gaskets, reinstall Bolts and Lockwashers and tighten down. Recheck Gear Back Lash.
After both Horizontal Hub assemblies have been installed, Install To fill Gearbox full of Oil. Fill till Oil runs out of oil level plug in side of gearbox housing. Insert Plugs, oil level plug on side and Vent plug on top. ALWAYS wait enough time for Oil to run in between Inner and Out Bearings on Out Put Shaft Assemblies before deciding Oil Level is Full. After running mower for 30 minutes to an hour always recheck oil level.

GEARBOX P/N 00769912
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Shaft, Bearings & Gear in Main Housing (1).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (Item 1) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (item 2 Cup & Cone) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (item 2 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (item 29 & 31 a/r) as down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (item 9) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 10) onto top of Output Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut with Cotter Pin.
Install Output Seal (item 3), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Seal Protector welds to Blade Hub on this style Gearbox., Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft, Shaft, Bearings & Gear into Main Housing (item 1).
Install Innser Input Bearing Cup (item 12 Cup & Cone) into inside of Main Housing. Slide Inner Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) into Inner Bearing Cup, Slide Sleeve (item 13 Long Sleeve) onto back side of Input Shaft (item 26), Holding Sleeve on drop Input Shaft into Housing till it is seated in inner Bearing Cone.
Slide Sleeve (item 28 Short Sleeve) down on Input Shaft, Install Shims (item 29 & 31 a/r) on input shaft against short sleeve. Slide Gear down on input shaft. Slide Outer Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) down against Gear.
Install Outer Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into front Bearing Cover (item 24), Using Shims (Item 20, 21 & 22 a/r) quantity as required on Front Bearing Cover, Tighten Bolts in front cover.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque), Change the Bearing Pre-Load by adding or removing Shims (item 20, 21 & 22) from front Bearing Cover, When Bearing Pre-Load is correct go on to Gear Back-Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash), Change Gear Back Lash by adding or removing Gear Shims (item 29 & 31) BUT it is important to make sure what ever you add or remove the same thickness must be changed on Input Bearing Cover shims to keep Bearing Pre-Load correct. in some cases it will be required to change the Shims (item 29 & 3)1 on Output gear to raise or lower Gear.
Install Input Seal (item 25) if Bearing Pre-Load and Gear Back-Lash is correct. Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease before sliding it over input shaft.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket, Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00769915
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Shaft, Bearings & Gear in Main Housing (1).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (Item 1) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (item 2 Cup & Cone) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (item 2 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (item 13 & 15 a/r) as down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (item 9) over Output Shaft (item 8), Make sure it is seated against Shim. Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 10) onto top of Output Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 10) above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut with Cotter Pin (item 11).
Install Output Seal (item 3), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Seal Protector welds to Blade Hub on this style Gearbox., Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft, Shaft, Bearings & Gear into Main Housing (item 1).
With Gearbox Main Housing laying on its Back Side. Install Inner Input Bearing Cup (item 12 Cup & Cone) into inside of Main Housing. Slide Inner Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) into Inner Bearing Cup, Lay Shims (item 13 & 15 a/r) on top of inner Bearing Cone. Lay Input Gear (item 16) in Housing against Shims and inner Bearing Cone. This can be tricky as inner Bearing Cone, Shims and Input Gear ID must line up so Input Shaft (item 30) can drop through them.
Slide Sleeve (item 31 Long Sleeve) down on Input Shaft, Slide Outer Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) down against Long Sleeve (item 31).
Install Outer Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into front Bearing Cover (item 24), Using Shims (Item 20, 21 & 22 a/r) quantity as required on Front Bearing Cover, Tighten Bolts in front cover.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque), Change the Bearing Pre-Load by adding or removing Shims (item 20, 21 & 22) from front Bearing Cover, When Bearing Pre-Load is correct go on to Gear Back-Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash), Change Gear Back Lash by adding or removing Gear Shims (item 13 & 15) BUT it is important to make sure what ever you add or remove the same thickness must be changed on Input Bearing Cover shims to keep Bearing Pre-Load correct. in some cases it will be required to change the Shims (item 13 & 15) on Output gear to raise or lower Gear.
Install Input Seal (item 25) if Bearing Pre-Load and Gear Back-Lash is correct. Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease before sliding it over input shaft.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket, Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00769918
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Shaft, Bearings & Gear in Main Housing (1).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (Item 1) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (item 2 Cup & Cone) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (item 2 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (item 29 & 31 a/r) as down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (item 9) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 10) onto top of Output Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut with Cotter Pin.
Install Output Seal (item 3), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Seal Protector welds to Blade Hub on this style Gearbox., Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft, Shaft, Bearings & Gear into Main Housing (item 1).
Install Innser Input Bearing Cup (item 12 Cup & Cone) into inside of Main Housing. Slide Inner Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) into Inner Bearing Cup, Slide Sleeve (item 13 Long Sleeve) onto back side of Input Shaft (item 26), Holding Sleeve on drop Input Shaft into Housing till it is seated in inner Bearing Cone.
Slide Sleeve (item 28 Short Sleeve) down on Input Shaft, Install Shims (item 29 & 31 a/r) on input shaft against short sleeve. Slide Gear down on input shaft. Slide Outer Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) down against Gear.
Install Outer Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into front Bearing Cover (item 24), Using Shims (Item 20, 21 & 22 a/r) quantity as required on Front Bearing Cover, Tighten Bolts in front cover.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque), Change the Bearing Pre-Load by adding or removing Shims (item 20, 21 & 22) from front Bearing Cover, When Bearing Pre-Load is correct go on to Gear Back-Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash), Change Gear Back Lash by adding or removing Gear Shims (item 29 & 31) BUT it is important to make sure what ever you add or remove the same thickness must be changed on Input Bearing Cover shims to keep Bearing Pre-Load correct. in some cases it will be required to change the Shims (item 29 & 3)1 on Output gear to raise or lower Gear.
Install Input Seal (item 25) if Bearing Pre-Load and Gear Back-Lash is correct. Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease before sliding it over input shaft.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket, Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00769921
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Shaft, Bearings & Gear in Main Housing (1).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (Item 1) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (item 2 Cup & Cone) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (item 2 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (item 13 & 15 a/r) as down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (item 9) over Output Shaft (item 8), Make sure it is seated against Shim. Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 10) onto top of Output Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 10) above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut with Cotter Pin (item 11).
Install Output Seal (item 3), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Seal Protector welds to Blade Hub on this style Gearbox., Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft, Shaft, Bearings & Gear into Main Housing (item 1).
With Gearbox Main Housing laying on its Back Side. Install Inner Input Bearing Cup (item 12 Cup & Cone) into inside of Main Housing. Slide Inner Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) into Inner Bearing Cup, Lay Shims (item 13 & 15 a/r) on top of inner Bearing Cone. Lay Input Gear (item 16) in Housing against Shims and inner Bearing Cone. This can be tricky as inner Bearing Cone, Shims and Input Gear ID must line up so Input Shaft (item 30) can drop through them.
Slide Sleeve (item 31 Long Sleeve) down on Input Shaft, Slide Outer Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) down against Long Sleeve (item 31).
Install Outer Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into front Bearing Cover (item 24), Using Shims (Item 20, 21 & 22 a/r) quantity as required on Front Bearing Cover, Tighten Bolts in front cover.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque), Change the Bearing Pre-Load by adding or removing Shims (item 20, 21 & 22) from front Bearing Cover, When Bearing Pre-Load is correct go on to Gear Back-Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash), Change Gear Back Lash by adding or removing Gear Shims (item 13 & 15) BUT it is important to make sure what ever you add or remove the same thickness must be changed on Input Bearing Cover shims to keep Bearing Pre-Load correct. in some cases it will be required to change the Shims (item 13 & 15) on Output gear to raise or lower Gear.
Install Input Seal (item 25) if Bearing Pre-Load and Gear Back-Lash is correct. Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease before sliding it over input shaft.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket, Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00769924
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Shaft, Bearings & Gear in Main Housing (1).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (Item 1) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (item 2 Cup & Cone) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (item 2 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (item 29 & 31 a/r) as down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (item 9) over Output Shaft, Make sure it is seated against Shim. Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 10) onto top of Output Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut with Cotter Pin.
Install Output Seal (item 3), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Seal Protector welds to Blade Hub on this style Gearbox., Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft, Shaft, Bearings & Gear into Main Housing (item 1).
Install Innser Input Bearing Cup (item 12 Cup & Cone) into inside of Main Housing. Slide Inner Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) into Inner Bearing Cup, Slide Sleeve (item 13 Long Sleeve) onto back side of Input Shaft (item 26), Holding Sleeve on drop Input Shaft into Housing till it is seated in inner Bearing Cone.
Slide Sleeve (item 28 Short Sleeve) down on Input Shaft, Install Shims (item 29 & 31 a/r) on input shaft against short sleeve. Slide Gear down on input shaft. Slide Outer Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) down against Gear.
Install Outer Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into front Bearing Cover (item 24), Using Shims (Item 20, 21 & 22 a/r) quantity as required on Front Bearing Cover, Tighten Bolts in front cover.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque), Change the Bearing Pre-Load by adding or removing Shims (item 20, 21 & 22) from front Bearing Cover, When Bearing Pre-Load is correct go on to Gear Back-Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash), Change Gear Back Lash by adding or removing Gear Shims (item 29 & 31) BUT it is important to make sure what ever you add or remove the same thickness must be changed on Input Bearing Cover shims to keep Bearing Pre-Load correct. in some cases it will be required to change the Shims (item 29 & 3)1 on Output gear to raise or lower Gear.
Install Input Seal (item 25) if Bearing Pre-Load and Gear Back-Lash is correct. Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease before sliding it over input shaft.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket, Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.

GEARBOX P/N 00769927
Install Output Shaft (Blade Shaft), Shaft, Bearings & Gear in Main Housing (1).
Install Upper Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into Main Housing (Item 1) from the top, Install Lower Bearing Cup (item 2 Cup & Cone) into Main housing from the bottom.
Install the Lower Bearing Cone (item 2 Cup & Cone)) down over Output Shaft. Insert Output Shaft with Bearing Cone on it up through Main Housing from the bottom. Put Upper Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) over Out Put Shaft and slide down till it bottoms out in upper Bearing Cup.
Install Shims (item 13 & 15 a/r) as down over top of Output Shaft, The number of shims required will vary, try to use the same amount as were removed. Install Output Gear (item 9) over Output Shaft (item 8), Make sure it is seated against Shim. Screw Slotted Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 10) onto top of Output Shaft.
Tighten Bearing Adjusting Nut (item 10) above Gear till Bearings have 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque then Lock Nut with Cotter Pin (item 11).
Install Output Seal (item 3), Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease. Seal Protector welds to Blade Hub on this style Gearbox., Check Bearing Pre-Load Again. Output Shaft Should have NO end play inward or outward. and Bearing MUST be set at a rolling Torque.
Install Input Shaft, Shaft, Bearings & Gear into Main Housing (item 1).
With Gearbox Main Housing laying on its Back Side. Install Inner Input Bearing Cup (item 12 Cup & Cone) into inside of Main Housing. Slide Inner Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) into Inner Bearing Cup, Lay Shims (item 13 & 15 a/r) on top of inner Bearing Cone. Lay Input Gear (item 16) in Housing against Shims and inner Bearing Cone. This can be tricky as inner Bearing Cone, Shims and Input Gear ID must line up so Input Shaft (item 30) can drop through them.
Slide Sleeve (item 31 Long Sleeve) down on Input Shaft, Slide Outer Bearing Cone (item 12 Cup & Cone) down against Long Sleeve (item 31).
Install Outer Bearing Cup (Item 12 Cup & Cone) into front Bearing Cover (item 24), Using Shims (Item 20, 21 & 22 a/r) quantity as required on Front Bearing Cover, Tighten Bolts in front cover.
Check Bearing Pre-Load (should be 14" to 16" pounds of rolling Torque), Change the Bearing Pre-Load by adding or removing Shims (item 20, 21 & 22) from front Bearing Cover, When Bearing Pre-Load is correct go on to Gear Back-Lash between Blade Shaft Gear and Input Gear (should have .017" to .019" back Lash), Change Gear Back Lash by adding or removing Gear Shims (item 13 & 15) BUT it is important to make sure what ever you add or remove the same thickness must be changed on Input Bearing Cover shims to keep Bearing Pre-Load correct. in some cases it will be required to change the Shims (item 13 & 15) on Output gear to raise or lower Gear.
Install Input Seal (item 25) if Bearing Pre-Load and Gear Back-Lash is correct. Coat ID of Seal with light coat of grease before sliding it over input shaft.
When this has been Done fill Gearbox with Oil, Before deciding Gearbox is full wait long enough for Oil to run down between Output Shaft Bearing, Then refill with Oil, install Top Cover (using Sealer for Gasket, Oil Plugs and check for leaks, After running Mower 1/2 to 1 hour check Oil Level and recheck for leaks.
