ASSEMBLY
Construction is broken into several sub-assemblies. The first is the base-crankshaft. Then the valve gear is partially assembled on the columns in two groups, front and rear. These are then attached to the base-crankshaft assembly. Last the cylinder assembly is built and attached to the other two sections. At this point the valve gear is adjusted and the remaining details are finished up.

BASE-CRANKSHAFT ASSEMBLY
Clean and remove and burrs on the BASE (53070), BEARINGS (53083), CRANKSHAFT ASSEMBLY (A2007), ECCENTRICS (53076), and ECCENTRIC STRAPS (53075).  Polish any parts if desired.
Slide a 3/16” x 5/16” x 0.015” WASHER (51006) on each end of the crankshaft assembly. Place a drop of oil on each end of the crankshaft and then slide a bearing on each end of the crankshaft. Slide each bearing back and forth to distribute the oil. Slide the bearings and washers against the crankwebs of the crankshaft assembly.
Place the base on a flat surface with the rounded edges of the base up. Set the crankshaft assembly so the crankwebs set in the opening in the center of the base. Secure the assembly to the base using four 2-56 x 1/4 pan head screws (12216). Do not tighten. Place the two outer bearings on the crankshaft and secure with four more 2-56 X 1/4 screws. Tighten the 8 screws a little at a time while rotating the crankshaft to check for binding. Adjust the bearings so the crankshaft turns with a minimum of binding. Minor binding will not cause any problems, as the bearings will seat in after a short period of running.
Mark the outer bearing as to position and which end they are on and remove them.
Insert a BUSHING (54040) through the hole in the flat portion of each eccentric strap from the side opposite the flat side. Holding the bushings in place, file the small ends flush with the flat side of the eccentric straps. As it will be some time before assembly holds these bushings in place, temporarily use a 0-80 x 3/16 pan head screw (10212) and a 0-80 nut to hold them in place.
Install a setscrew (12608) in each eccentric. Place a drop of oil on each eccentric where it will fit into the eccentric strap. Slide each eccentric into the flat side of an eccentric strap. Position the setscrew towards the arm of the eccentric strap. Slide an eccentric assembly on each end of the crankshaft with the hub of the eccentric to the outside of the engine. Do not tighten the eccentric set screws. Replace the outer bearings in the same position that you removed them. Tighten the bearing screws and check the crankshaft for binding.
Your base-crankshaft assembly should look like the photo on the previous page at this point. Set this assembly aside and start on the next assemblies.

VALVE GEAR ASSEMBLIES
Build the two valve gear assemblies at the same time. They are identical except that they are mirror images of each other. Only the front assembly will be detailed with notes for the rear assembly. Photo 2 shows the two assemblies with the front assembly on the left and the rear assembly on the right.
Clean and remove burrs on the columns (53073), bellcranks (53074), offset links (53087), 2 hole links (53088), and Bellcrank mount bushings (54104).
The bellcranks have the remains of three small tabs used to support the part during machining. These are on the outside edges of the parts. File these tabs off and then take a few extra strokes to remove the machining cutter marks on these edges. File lengthwise on these edges. Although not necessary for operation, the flat faces of these parts can be improved by filing. If you plan to polish these parts, wait a little while, as two screws need to be filed off flush during assembly. Then you can disassemble that part, polish the bellcranks, and reassemble.
One end of the short links will also have a small tab that must be filed off. If you get a little flat on this end when filing, you can hide that end in slot of the fork a little later.
Insert a bellcrank mount bushing into the side of a column. File the small protruding end of the bushing flush by placing the file on a flat surface and slide the assembly over the file while pressing on the bushing. Repeat for the rear assembly.
The short end of each column goes toward the top of the engine. Insert a 2-56 x ½” pan head screw through the bushing from the small diameter end of the bushing. Thread the screw into a bellcrank. The bellcrank is spaced away from the column by the large end of the bushing. Repeat for the second column but place the bellcrank in a mirror image position. Rotate the bellcranks so the long arm is perpendicular to the column and the short end is toward the top of the column. Facing the bellcrank side of the assemblies, the front assembly will have the arms of the bellcrank to the right of the column and the rear assembly will have the arms to the left.
Place the offset links on a flat surface so the long end lays flat on the surface. The short end will not touch the surface. Insert a BUSHING (54040) in the hole in the long end of each link. File the bushings flush on the other side. Insert a 0-80 X 3/16” pan head screw through the small end of each bushing. Thread the screw into the short arm of the bellcrank from the side of the bellcrank nearest the column. Repeat for the other assembly.
[OPTIONAL] The two screw ends that protrude from the bellcrank look much better if they are filed flush with the bellcrank. After filing these screws flush, the screws may be removed and the bellcrank polished. Then reassemble.
Insert a Bushing (54040) in one end of each of the short 2 hole links. If one end of the link is distorted from filing the tab, insert the bushing in the best looking end. The other end will be hidden during final assembly. File the protruding small end of the bushing flush with the link. Insert a 0-80 X 1/8” pan head in the small end of the bushing and attach to the long arm of the bellcrank on the side away the column. Repeat for the second assembly.

BUILDING UPWARD
The photo above shows how to tie together everything we have done so far plus add a few more pieces.
Attach the 2 valve gear assemblies just completed to the right side of the crankshaft-base assembly. The right side is the side that has the extra hole near the center of the crankshaft assembly. Facing the right side, the front valve gear assembly goes to your right. Attach the columns to the base using 2-56 X 1/4 pan head screws. Make sure the long ends of the columns are next to the base. The linkage is to the ends of the engine, approximately in line with the eccentrics. As you tighten the screws, lay a straight edge between the two columns along the flat edges of the columns. Adjust the columns rotation so the straight edge touches all along both the flats on the columns.
Remove the screws used to hold the bushings in the eccentric straps. Position the bellcrank so the long end is horizontal and over the eccentric. The short end should be towards the top of the engine. Place a 0-80 X 1/8 screw through the bushing in the eccentric strap from the flat side of the strap and thread it into the tapped hole on the offset link and tighten. Slide the eccentric towards the center of the engine. View the assembly from the top of the engine. The bellcrank should be parallel to the long end of the offset link and have a uniform space between them. If not, slightly adjust the rotation of the column. Repeat for the other end of the engine. All the linkages should move freely at this point.
Clean, remove burrs, and polish the male t-slot slides (53084), the female t-slot slide assemblies (A2014), and the reverse linkage connector. Put a drop of oil in each of the female t-slot slides. Slide a male slide into each female slide assembly to check for fit. Please note that the male slides are NOT square. The narrow dimension only will fit in the female slide assembly. These will be a close fit. Do not file the slides unless absolutely necessary to fit them together. Remove the male slides. Insert the male slides in the end holes of the eccentric straps with the flat faces of the slides facing each other. Secure the male slides to the eccentric straps with 0-80 X 1/8 pan head screws.
Insert 3 setscrews (12608) in the tapped holes on the reverse linkage connector.
Attach the columns to the left side of the base using 2-56 x 1/4 inch screws aligning them in the same way you aligned the other columns. You should be able to see through both holes at the same time.
Rotate the eccentric straps so they are vertical with the “U” on the bellcranks facing upward. With the connector between the columns, insert a female slide assembly through each column and into the ends of the connector block
Now comes the tricky part. I had you insert the male slides in the female part earlier so you know they really do fit. Rotate a female slide about 30 degrees so that it's opening is towards a point over the crankshaft at the top of the engine. Move the male slide into position over the end of the female slide by rotating the eccentric strap. Guide the male slide into the female slide and rotate the female slide so the slide part is vertical and the male slide is fully engaged. Repeat for the other set of guides.
Before setting this assembly aside, install the connecting rod assemblies (A2009) onto the crankshaft assembly. Do this one at a time so the parts of the two connecting rods do not get mixed up.
Before removing the connecting rod bearing cap from the connecting rod, mark one side of the rod and bearing cap with a marker or pencil so you know which way to reinstall the cap on the rod. A small scratch will also work and will be permanent for future use if necessary. The rod and cap have had the bearing surface machined at the same time so everything will match properly. If the caps are mixed up on the rods, there is a fair chance that one of the rods will fit tight on the crankpin.
Rotate the crankshaft so one of the crankpins is at the bottom of the engine.
Remove the connecting rod cap from the connecting rod by loosening the two screws holding the cap on. Leave the screws in the cap. Put a drop of oil on the bearing surface of the connecting rod.
From the top of the engine, slide the connecting rod between the crankwebs onto the crankpin that is at the bottom of the engine.
While holding the connecting rod in place, turn the engine over and place the bearing cap with screws on the connecting rod and tighten the screws. Pay attention to the alignment marks that you made on the two parts. The connecting rod will probably be slightly tight on the crankpin, but should move easily with finger pressure.
Repeat the procedure with the other connecting rod.
Now set this assembly aside and smile. It's starting to look like an engine.

THE CYLINDER GROUP
In this assembly section a number of parts will require lapping as described in the general procedures. I prefer to lap all the parts at the same time and then clean and oil them before beginning assembly.
Check the paragraph on gaskets and gasketing materials in the general notes. For most builders, gaskets or gasketing materials will not be necessary if lapping is done carefully. However laser cut gaskets are included.
The areas that require lapping are:
1.	Both ends of each cylinder.
2.	The cylinder port face on each cylinder.
3.	The steam chest faces that contact the cylinder and chest cover.
4.	The side of the steam chests that mount the steam manifold.
5.	One side of the steam chest covers.
6.	One side of the cylinder covers.
7.	The side of the cylinder mount that does not have a seal recess.
8.	The flanges of the manifolds.
9.	The steam valve face with the rectangular recess.
Using a corner of the abrasive paper, remove any burrs that are around the exhaust holes on the side of the cylinder.
After lapping, clean everything to remove all traces of abrasive compound. This will require more than wiping with a cloth. The parts must be cleaned with either solvent or hot water with a detergent added. Be sure to flush out the steam passages in the cylinders.
Remove any burrs from the piston-piston rod assembly (A2001). Put a drop of oil in the groove on each piston. Slide the 3/8 ID O-Ring (40012) over the piston and into the groove. Place a drop of oil on each O-Ring and rotate the piston to coat the O-Ring with oil.
Hold the cylinder (53004) with the valve port face towards you and the exhaust opening to your left. Slide the piston into the cylinder with the piston rod down. This is the front cylinder set.
Install the piston in the other cylinder in the same way except the exhaust opening must be to your right. This is the rear cylinder set.
Hold the cylinder mount (53071) with side containing the seal recesses away from you. Rotate the mount so the edge with three holes is down. Insert the piston rod for the front cylinder in the center hole of the right set of holes and position the cylinder so the flat port face is to your right. Secure the cylinder to the cylinder mount with two 2-56 X 1/4 pan head screws (12216). Install these two screws in the holes that are rotated 90 degrees from the 0-80 tapped holes in the cylinder mount.
Check the assembly. The exhaust outlet on the side of the cylinder must be towards the edge of the cylinder mount that has 3 holes.
Mount the second cylinder in the same manner. When mounted, both cylinders will have the exhaust outlets on the same side.
Slide a 1/8 ID O-Ring (40006) over each piston rod and press it into the seal recess on the cylinder mount. Be careful going over the threads of the piston rod so the threads don't damage the O-Ring.
Slide a 1/8 ID seal retainer (51008) over each piston rod and secure each to the cylinder mount with two 0-80 X 1/8 fillister head screws (10408).
Thread a 5-40 X 0.047 nut (53023) on each piston rod. Position it about the middle of the threaded part of each piston rod. It will be adjusted later.
Inspect each crosshead (53062) and crosshead guide (53061) and remove any burrs. Check by test fitting the crossheads in the guides. Remove the crossheads from the guides.
Install a crosshead on each connecting rod. Thread each crosshead on about 2 to 3 turns and adjust the crossheads so the threaded 2-56 hole in each of them faces the middle of the assembly (the holes will face each other).
Slide a crosshead guide over each crosshead so the two notches in the guide fit over the two screws holding the cylinder mount to the cylinder. Secure each crosshead guide using four 2-56 X 5/16 pan head screws (12220). Put a drop of oil on each side of the crosshead guide where it touches the crosshead.
A retaining compound is used to locate the valve driver on the valve spindle on the valve spindle assembly (A2004). There may a small amount of this retaining compound at each end of the valve driver. If so, scrape it off with a knife or screwdriver blade.
Test fit the valve driver in the valve (53103) slot. It should be a free easy fit, but with very little play. If it is tight, file the inside of the valve slot until it is an easy fit.
Slide the threaded end of the valve spindle assembly (A2004) through one of the end holes in the steam chest (53007) from the INSIDE of the steam chest until the not threaded end of the spindle fits inside the steam chest. Then slide the not threaded end through the end hole in the other end of the steam chest.
Place a drop of oil on each end of the valve spindle rod. Install a 1/16 ID O-Ring (40003) on each end of the valve spindle rod using care not to damage the O-Ring when sliding over the threaded portion of the rod.
Secure each O-Ring in place with a 1/16” hole seal retainer (51007) and two 0-80 X 1/8 fillister head screws (10408).
Repeat for the second set of valve chest parts.
Center the valve driver in each of the steam chests. Set the steam chests next to each other with the threaded end of the valve spindle facing you and the two steam inlets facing each other. Place a valve on each spindle.
Place a drop of oil on the port face of each of the cylinders between the steam port openings.
Place the steam chest assembly on your left on the port face of the front cylinder with the threaded end of the valve spindle at the crosshead end of the cylinder. The rectangular cavity of the valve must touch the port face of the cylinder. The steam inlet on the steam chest must be on the opposite side of the cylinder from the exhaust outlet in the cylinder. If not, you probably have the steam chest on the rear cylinder. Temporarily hold the steam chest to the cylinder using two 2-56 x 7/16 pan head screws (12228). Gently tighten these screws. If tightened firmly, they will damage the lapped surface of the steam chest and may cause a steam leak later.
Install the other steam chest assembly on the rear cylinder in the same manner.
Thread a 0-80 nut (10000) to the middle of the threaded portion of each valve spindle. Thread the tapered end of a fork (53089) on each valve spindle approximately 6 turns. Position the fork so the 0-80 tapped hole in the side of the fork that faces the crosshead guide.
